Thirty-Three Years of Undetected Crime

They Paid Me to Have Fun!















Written by Frank Albert  DUNN

 

Contents

My Earlier Years that I Can Remember	1

Hunting and Fishing in The Yukon	37

The Story Of The .219 Zipper Improved Rifle	57

Brief Info On Some Events In Newfoundland	61

Learning the area around St. John’s, Newfoundland	67

Royal Newfoundland Yacht Club	76

Yukon Flotilla 1967	82

Dealing with The Cold Weather	94

Choosing the Right Police Firearm	113

Refurbishing the RCMP Graveyard at Dawson City, Y.T.	126

Digging Graves In The RCMP Cemetery	138

Dangerous Grizzly Bear Encounter	141

Attempted bank robbery at Dawson City	147

Dawson City flood in 1964	151

Wolf Troubles	158

Trip up the Sixty Mile River	169

Stewart River’s trip from Dawson City	177

Time at Dawson City Postings	181

Seizure of Illegal Two-Way Radios	193

Checking on the Prisoner Work Gang	198

Looking after the Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development file	199

Hard lesson on learning the social structure of local natives	214

Major accident south of Watson Lake	217

Murder near Watson Lake, Yukon Territory 1967	220

Pipeline Break - Up The Canol Road	230

Search For The Swiss Mountain Climbers On The Nahanni River	248

Fort McPherson Grave Site Maintenance	259

Making a difficult arrest	267

Shell Oil tragedy with the drowning of five men in the Nodwell	272

Learning Instrument Flight Rules the Hard Way	276

Refurbishing The Aeronca 15ac Sedan	285

Flight from Fort McPherson to Coppermine	290

Search For Overdue Canoeists	295

Recover of Bodies In The Open Ocean.	304

Aircraft of Tundra	308

Flight from Coppermine To Grande Prairie	335

Halloween in Grande Prairie, 1971	341

Dog Teams Vs. Ski-Doos	345

My Help Building of Our House	354

Injury Accident in 1973 near Hythe, Alberta	364

Some of the Odd Stories	369

Search for the missing Prospectors	382

Assisting the Mining Recorder	391

Diving on The Pirate Ship in Ferryland Harbour	403

Scuba Diving – (Self Contained Breathing Apparatus)	409

Deepest dive with perfect visibility	420

Stories related to My Carcross Posting	427

Trip to the Engineer Gold Mine	438

Tagish Grave Sites	446

1987 Edmonton Tornado – F4 Tornado – Black Friday	456

Auxillary Constable Program	471



 

My Earlier Years that I Can Remember


My first memory is helping my grandfather by turning the handle on the fan that blew air into his forge. I would have been about five years old at the time. My father, Robert (Bob) John Dunn, was always away working for the Canadian Pacific Railway (C.P.R.) on the signal gang all over Ontario. They were tying one side of the rails together by drilling holes in the flange of the rail, placing a bronze plug in the holes, and tying the rail together with a copper wire so they could use it to signal if the line was not occupied by another train. He lived away in railroad accommodation and would only come home on weekends if they were working close enough for train connections.

My mother and I continued to live with my grandparents on their farm, which was located about six miles northeast of Coldwater, Ontario. My mother, Mary Dunn, was the thirteenth child raised in the family, and every one of the older children tended to her every need, so she never learned to cook or clean the house.

My grandfather, John Parnham, was born and raised in Ireland. After the Potato Famine in Ireland, he went to sea and eventually became a captain on a passenger liner, plying the route from Europe to Canada. He met a Dutch teacher on her way to settle in Canada. They agreed to marry, and he set her up in accommodation in Halifax, Nova Scotia, before piloting the ship back to England. He retired as captain and returned on the next available ship. They got married in Halifax and boarded the CPR railroad to see Canada, where they wanted to settle. They traveled as far west as Winnipeg but didn’t like the flat, endless prairie and decided to go back to the Maritimes. When the train stopped to take on water at a place called Lovering Station in central Ontario, they got off the train to stretch their legs. They saw fields of grain, big maple trees, and big spruce trees and decided this would be a good place to settle. They got their luggage off the train and walked away from the station. They encountered the North River school, went in to visit, and she was offered a job teaching on the spot. As they walked toward the town of Coldwater, they saw a sign at the gate that read “Help Wanted.” They went in, and a very senior farmer offered him a job and accommodation in a large brick five-bedroom house. He ended up buying the farm, and they settled there.

On my father’s side of the family, my grandmother was the last of eleven children born to John Mount Stephen. I have traced that side of the family back to 1735 in England, where John Mount Steven was the son of Lord Mount Steven. John got a Scotch kitchen maid pregnant, and his father exiled him to Canada, making him one of the first “remittance men” to arrive there. He was granted title to 500 acres, which was later called Mount Steven, about nine miles east of Coldwater, Ontario. My grandmother married John Albert Dunn, an “Aladdin Lamp” salesman with a horse and buggy with accommodation built on it. They had four children, and my father was the eldest. My grandfather was a bit of an alcoholic, and one night, while driving home, the horse was going full speed and struck the side of a bridge, killing him. She then married Clayton Blainey, the local butcher and brick maker in Coldwater, and they had one daughter, Sheila.

Grandma Parnham taught at the North River District School for many years, between having kids and remaining involved in school affairs for most of her life. She supplemented all of her children’s education and had a classroom with endless books and a blackboard in the back kitchen of the house. They raised thirteen children, and my mother was the 13th. She tutored every one of them in the classroom in the back kitchen. I was her last student, counting to a hundred, and I knew all of the “A-B-Cs” by the time I was five years old. She arranged for me to go to grade one when my birthday was August 28, and the school started on September 1st, which was in 1945.

My grandfather was looking at retiring and arranged to turn the farm over to my mother and dad. When my father didn’t stop working for the C.P.R. signal gang and came home, he made a list of things for me to do for the next week. He and Grandpa had a big discussion about not wanting to work the farm, and Grandpa told him he would have to find accommodation for his family. By this time, I had a sister and two brothers living in the house on the farm. Grandpa took the farm back, and my father bought five acres and a tarpaper three-room shack about a mile and a half out of Coldwater and three miles from where he worked as a signal maintainer at Medonte.

When I was fourteen, Grandpa had a heart attack, and the rest of the family was unable to help with running the farm. I was detailed about looking after the farm and livestock. I managed to plant oats, barley, wheat, and buckwheat and put up hay in the barn for the livestock. He had 26 cows, three Clydesdale horses, and 200 sheep, as well as six pigs, a dozen chickens, and the same number of geese and turkeys. In the fall, I had to cut and run the binder through the cropsand stook the crop, and neighbors came over to do the threshing and put it all in the granaries. In the fall, I would get up at 4:00 a.m., milk the 26 cows, and carry the milk to the back kitchen at the house. Grandma would do the separation and feed the fowl. I would catch the bus at 7:00 a.m. to go to high school in Orillia, come back home on the bus, and again milk the cows, feed the pigs and fowl, and put down hay for the cows and horses. The sheep were out in the pasture. Grandpa decided to have an auction sale, sell the farm, and move to a house they bought closer to Coldwater for medical attention. He gave me the money from the sale of all the extra animals that had arrived while I was looking after the farm. I used that money to buy a Harley Davidson “Electro-glide” motorcycle that was all fancied up with saddle bags and lots of chrome.

During the war, many farm boys went off to war and did not return. The government brought over many Dutch people and their families to replace some of the lost farm workers. They were committed to working on the farm for one year. This brought many Dutch kids to the local school, and my grandmother was employed to teach them English. If I recall correctly, there were only myself and another kid who spoke English in grade one, while the other eight spoke Dutch. It was a two-room school with only one teacher. My grandmother taught grades one to four in one room and the other four grades in the other room, as well as teaching the Dutch kids to speak English. I remember walking with my grandmother from home on the farm a mile and a half to her daughter’s farm. She usually stopped off for coffee or tea, and I walked with her kids the other mile and a half to school, then reversed the trip. During the winter, if there was a lot of snow on the road, my grandfather hitched up his Clydesdale horses to a sleigh with a big hay rack and a bit of a shelter to break the weather. He took all the kids to school along the route and came back at the end of the day to pick us up.

When it was time to go into grade two, the Dutch workers had completed their year of farm work. Some of the families went back to Holland, while others went to the cities to get jobs they had been trained for. I was placed in grade three because there were only two kids in grade two, and the same thing happened: I missed grade four and was put in grade five in my third year at school. This gave me a head start in my education, and I finished high school when I was only fifteen years old. My father, like his father, was a bit of an alcoholic and had only a grade-six education. He said he would not support any more education, so I was out in the workforce. The only jobs available were heavy-duty labor, as nobody wanted to hire a 15-year-old skinny kid.My first job was working hand-unloading gravel and sand into the big rocks around culverts along a new piece of highway. When the highway culverts were finished, so was the job. My next job was breaking up the cement sidewalks on Main Street in Orillia. We broke the cement with sledgehammers into small enough pieces to lift them up to someone who placed them in the truck's box. They were trying to cut down on the noise and didn’t use jackhammers, so the blocks of cement were placed, rather than thrown, into the truck. 

We worked 10-hour days and half a day on Saturday and received a total of $45.00 by Saturday noon. We paid $10.00 a week for morning and night fare to a chap who was a mailman in Orillia and lived in Coldwater. He didn’t work on Saturday afternoons, so another worker and I were trying to hitchhike a ride back home without much success. His dad had died earlier, and while we were trying to catch a ride, the Catholic Church up the street chimed one o'clock. He said he should go up and see the priest to get his father out of purgatory. Not knowing much about purgatory and not belonging to the Catholic Church, I went with him. I sat at the back of the church, listened to the priest mumble along in Latin, and watched him turn the envelope with his entire week’s pay over to the priest. We went back to the corner, and he was skipping happily but with no luck catching a ride. When the bus came along, we hailed it, and I had to pay for his fare since he had given the priest his entire pay. I thought about how hard we worked for 55 hours of backbreaking labor and how he turned that money over to the church. It didn’t sit well with me.

After three weeks of that job, my uncle Mel offered that I could stay in his apartment in Toronto, which was by Malton Airport and next to the Institute of Technology. He suggested I might get trained for a better job. He drove a truck for Miller Paving, hauling asphalt wherever they had contracts, and then steamed out the tanks before hauling salt slurry from Goderich to Toronto. I signed up for electrical engineering and found it quite interesting. I was at the college for almost six months. One of the teachers was from England and had a Cockney accent. We had great difficulty understanding him most of the time and he wasn’t liked by everyone in the class because of his accent and reluctance to repeat what the students couldn’t understand. Four of us decided to play a joke on him.

We had a hand-crank generator in the classroom that could build up an electrical charge and send an arc a good six inches between the balls at the top. He would display and talk about something on the board, then usually go over and sit on a big padded chair behind his desk in a raised area of the classroom and respond to questions from there. We ran two wires to each side of his padded chair and over to the generator, which was behind a curtain at the side of the classroom. One of our group manned the generator, and another member directed him from his side of the classroom on when to crank up the generator from behind the curtain. The irony of the situation built up because someone would ask him another question when he was just about at his chair, and the generator would be started. He would return to the board to explain further and then head back to his chair, only to be asked another question and go back to the board. This back-and-forth routine continued at least half a dozen times before he pulled out the chair, bent forward at the desk, and pulled the chair forward underneath him, sitting solidly down. He immediately bolted upwards, taking the desk off the raised area, and he went with the desk. The investigation into the incident resulted in four of us being expelled from the Institute.

I got my next job operating a big D8 cable blade Caterpillar, leveling dirt on an overpass being built in Toronto, and when the overpass was completed, so was the job. I returned home to Coldwater and took a course on building firearms. The test at the end of the course involved givinga block of steel, a hacksaw, a drill bit, and files to build a miniature pistol. You passed if it fired a .22 short cartridge at least once. There was no spring steel provided, so I used a big elastic to provide power to bring the hammer forward when it was held in the vice. I fired it several times remotely before taking it to the instructor and passed the course. I still have it in my collection.

My father was an alcoholic and came home drunk one night. My mother had neglected to put away the dishes after washing them, and he was going to get her out of bed to put them away. I came downstairs from upstairs and met him in the hallway, telling him I would put them away. He came back out of the bedroom, took the dishes out of the cupboard, and smashed them on the floor, shouting at my mother to clean them up. He pushed me back when I said I would clean up the mess, took a swing at me, and ducked, causing him to hit his fist on the refrigerator. I moved out of the corner, and he took a run at me. I dropped and sent him over me and into the wall. I left the house and went to the bathroom, which was a path and a two-holer. On the way back toward the house, I could make him out with a 2x4 in the shadow of the house. I talked with him and told him I was leaving home. I had my suitcase packed and was not going to put up with any more of his drinking. I went around him, entered the house, picked up my suitcase, and met him on the front steps. He said if I decided to come back, here was his railroad pass. I took it and left, staying with my grandmother in town and paying her for the room. I never went back home for three years.

I made quite a bit of money playing “pea pool” at Joe’s Pool Room in Coldwater, but I could see there wasn’t much of a guaranteed future with that as a vocation. Two of my acquaintances were planning to go west, as one had gone there the year before, and said there were always farm jobs available in Saskatchewan with food and accommodation supplied. We pooled our money, bought a ’49 Studebaker vehicle, and had to buy a battery to see if we could get it running. We brought along all the camping gear, blankets, a tent, pots and pans, and other gear we could round up and headed west.

Neither of them had much money and were awful cooks, but the first long day ended when we got stuck in the sand on the new construction near a little town of Ipsaly in Northern Ontario and burned out the clutch of the vehicle trying to get out. The Trans Canada Highway was being built at the time, and there was a construction crew camp right where we got stuck. We went to the camp to tell them that we hadbroken down in the middle of their sand trap, and it turned out my uncle was the foreman. He said that he had lost his water truck driver, scraper driver, and cat driver because they couldn’t stand the mosquitoes, black flies, and other bugs. He said he heard I was working driving a cat in Toronto when he was home last week and asked if I wanted to drive a cat. So our next jobs were handed to us, and they had a good cook to make it even better, though it didn’t help with the bugs. My job was pushing dirt across about half a mile of muskeg. I drove the cat while the other boys drove the scraper and the water truck. I pushed the dirt delivered by the scraper, and my friend watered it down while I ran the cat back and forth a few times, packing and leveling it.

We phoned the Studebaker dealer in Sudbury and arranged for the clutch to be delivered to . We lifted the vehicle with the blade of the cat using some chains and replaced the clutch during our off hours. We finished the roadway across the muskeg, and the boys decided they wanted to go into Dryden and visit the bar on our day off. They went to the bar, and I went to the donut shop and walked around the boat docks. They were both drunk when we left Dryden, and I drove back to camp. When I came to the muskeg crossing, I stopped because it didn’t look right; it was all black, and we had filled it with light-colored sand. The entire two weeks of our work had sunk, and the muskeg was a good five feet high on both sides. We went around the muskeg area and back to camp to break the bad news to my uncle. We spent another month hauling dirt to fill the five feet of water over our previous road and made it wider and higher. When that section was complete, he wanted us to go to the next job he had lined up. Both of them told him they had jobs lined up in Saskatchewan for the harvest, so we headed out again.

When we got to Winnipeg, it was raining heavily, and we had to replace the windshield wipers. Near the Saskatchewan/Manitoba border, we got stuck in the mud in the middle of the road, thanks to the prairie gumbo. There was a camp right where we got stuck, and they were building the four-foot Trans Canada Pipeline. We asked if we could get one of the trucks or cats to pull us out. Since it was raining heavily, he couldn’t convince any of the cat drivers to go, and when one of the trucks tried, all it did was spray a lot of mud onto the windshield. I was talking with the foreman, who said he was having trouble keeping welders because of the mud and welding the pipe over the open pit. If the men fell into the trench and weren’t strong swimmers with the welding gear on, sometimes there was ten feet of water in the trench, and there was nothing to rescue them with on the job site. He asked if any of us could weld, and I told him I had learned some in high school and helped a friend whose father had set him up in a welding shop when he got a big order. I worked for him to try and complete that project. He asked what we were welding, and I told him it was filing cabinets. He said if I had learned to patch holes in that light metal, then I was a welder, and I could come to work in the morning.

The other two didn’t know how to weld, and I told him that we had just come off a job building the Trans Canada Highway, and I was the cat skinner on that job. By this time, there were three more vehicles stuck on the roadway near ours. He told me to take one of the cats and see if I could clear a layer of mud off the road and pull them out. About twenty minutes later, my partners were off to Regina. It was simple shifting over to stick welding because they had the correct rod and the right heat setup for the pipe thickness. They had a government inspector come around almost every week, and you had to weld a quarter-inch thick couple of plates together. He would put them in a vice, and with a big wrench, he would bend them back and forth. If they broke on the weld and not on the heat line, you picked up your lunch pail and were not allowed to continue welding on the pipeline. That made it so you earned a “B” Class pressure certificate, and I have been burning iron ever since.

Wherever I went with the Force, I didn’t mind volunteering for the tough welding jobs just to keep my hand in practice, like welding grouser plates onto a set of Cat tracks. In the first three years of construction (1956–58), workers installed 3,500 kilometers of 48-inch pipe, stretching from Sherwood Park, Alberta, and began delivering natural gas to Regina, Winnipeg, Toronto, and Montreal. The problem for a fifteen-year-old kid was that when the pipeline was finished, there were 1,500 welders looking for work, so welding as a career choice was not considered.

I headed out to Regina and got my first job at the home of the City of Regina’s chief architect, who had a butler and a nice young French maid. I was the gardener, living in the tool shed at the back of the property. She was frightened of the Natives and asked if I would accompany her on a walk in the neighborhood. When we got back, the police were there and found some of the household silver under my mattress. The policemen realized what had happened, and it ended up that I was fired, as well as the butler. They could see that the English butler was involved with the French maid and didn’t want any competition.

About four days later, I was having supper at a Chinese restaurant when an Aboriginal man came in, quite intoxicated and wielding a straight razor, demanding money. Someone in the back must have called the police. I had done a lot of fighting at dances and took boxing in high school, so I figured I could knock him out because he was really drunk. I wrapped my coat around my forearm in case I didn’t knock him out. I walked up behind him and said, “Don’t be stupid,” wanting him to turn around before I struck him. He swung around and cut my upper left arm with the straight razor. I hit him and knocked him out just as the police came through the door. They had seen what happened from the outside window, and one of the policemen had been at the stolen silver investigation earlier in the week. They called another car to come for the unconscious drunk, and when they arrived, they took me to the hospital, where I got my arm stitched up. The policeman said I should be a policeman, and when I told him I was only fifteen years old, he told me to come back in three years as they were always looking for big guys who could handle themselves. That idea sort of stuck in the back of my mind.

I got a rooming house and went to the unemployment office, where there were only farmhand job opportunities inplaces I did not know. I was sitting there, as it was raining outside when a lady came in and walked right over to me and asked, “Are you looking for work?” I replied affirmatively, and she told me to come with her and get in the car. She asked me my name and where I was from when we got underway, and she said her husband needed help getting the crop off as he had too much land to handle without a lot of hired hands. She asked if I knew anything about farming, and I told her that I was born and raised on a farm back in Ontario and knew for a fact that I was not going to be a farmer.

So, for the next year, I worked atMcDougall Farms for $100.00 a month. Every payday, there was a family discussion that he should give me more money, as I worked twice as hard as any farmhand he had ever had. Being a true Scotsman, he refused, and she would end the discussion by saying she would make it up to me. When she died, the first thing in her will was, “The Mustang goes to Frank.” The family delivered the car, and I am now the proud owner of a 1982 candy apple red Mustang GT. I can honestly say it was only driven by a lady to church to get groceries and to have coffee with her friends. And she certainly made it up to me.

They had three boys and a girl, and about five years after I left the farm, they had another boy. We have remained friends with the family over the years. It seemed every time we went across Canada and back to visit relatives in Ontario, we either stayed at the farm or, more recently, with their daughter. I did the wedding pictures for two of her daughters.

I used the railroad pass to take me next to Vancouver and got a job as a summer laborer with the Fish and Game Department. We went over to Long Beach on the west coast of Vancouver Island. We traveled in a one-ton dual axle truck, and the initial job was removing all of the “draft dodgers” and “hippies” who were camped in their hovels among the big logs on the beach. They loaded what they wanted to keep, and the rest went into the fires they had going. We transported them to the ferry terminal at Nanaimo, as they were going to open it as a Provincial Park. The road over there was hardly more than a goat trail, and the bridges were just two big logs with a small flat area on top. I walked across them because they were wet and it was raining.

When we got back, I was assigned to the Animal Science Section, initially banding eaglets in high tree nests. This involved two of us climbing the trees with spurs and rope slings—one person watched for the eagle parents, and the other banded the eaglets.

The next job was to help the Director shoot and tranquilize grizzly bears that were catching salmon. We would weigh them, take blood and hair samples, and check their health. One particularly big bear was watching us while we handled him. I told the doctor that he would be really dangerous when he woke up and that he hadn’t given him a large enough dose. The doctor disagreed, so I took off my coveralls, put a stick through the sleeves, and hung it in the willows down the trail from where we had been dealing with the bear. We all headed up a very steep, rocky area to watch what happened. The bear got up, looked around, and tore down the trail to the coveralls, swatting them several times. He then went down the riverbank, came back, and chewed and swatted the coveralls lying on the ground. After that, he didn’t question anything I suggested.

Our next assignment was going up to the Queen Charlotte Islands (currently known as Haida Gwaii) to catch and band the small Sitka deer unique to the island. They are about the size of a large collie dog and have horns that they know how to use, especially if they were caught the second or third time. We would hang fish nets in the bush and then go through the bush, trying to scare them into the nets. We would then weigh them and follow the same routine with blood and hair samples. They were not tranquilized, so we had to hold them down or contain them and try to take them out of the net. Several of the bucks were quite aggressive about being handled and used their horns offensively, slashing at us with their front feet. We were there for six weeks, and it rained day and night for the entire time. We lived in tents, and the only thing available to burn for some heat was cedar, which sparked continuously. We had a fire going in front of the tent, and some of our clothes were hung up inside the tent to try to dry for the next day. Every bit of my wardrobe had numerous holes burned in them.

When we got back to Vancouver, the mammologist had his clothing replaced by the Department, and because we were summer students, we received absolutely no compensation. My wages for those six weeks didn’t cover half of the wardrobe I had to replace, so I decided I could no longer afford to work for the B.C. Fish and Game Department. I had had enough of the west coast and the rain, so I brought out the railroad pass and decided to go home, as my sister had written that my mother had been diagnosed with serious diabetes. When we got to Rogers Pass, there were two slides from all the rain, and the train was stranded between the huge amounts of gravel that had come down over the tracks. We sat there for a week while food was flown in by helicopter to feed the passengers.

When I got to Sudbury, where you change trains to head towards southern Ontario, I went in and got a ticket to head for Halifax, Nova Scotia, as they would figure I was a sissy coming home so quickly. It was a beautiful trip with all the fall colors. When I got to Halifax, the job market was non-existent. After a week, I finally got offered a job on a dragger fishing boat. The pay wasn’t much, but we were promised a share of what we were going to catch. I started to realize it might not be that great a deal when I helped carry groceries for five people, including a 75-pound sack of potatoes, a big bag of onions, four turnips, a small bag of carrots, a square cardboard container of lard weighing 75 pounds, and a 50-pound bag of flour.We left Halifax and let out the net shortly after leaving the land. Our first haul was mostly junk fish, and a lot of it went into making a never-ending pot of fish stew on the back burner of the stove. We caught a few cod, and only the tongues and jowls went into the pot. I was instructed on how the fish were to be cleaned. It seemed that the seagulls must have heard the winch cables start because they congregated around the boat, and I hadn’t seen one since we left the harbor. I watched the fish-locating instrumentation; it was an art to set the depth of the net where the instrumentation showed a greater congregation of fish and their approximate depth.

After three days out on the Grand Banks, we were hit with some really heavy seas, which obstructed fishing. We had to head directly into the big waves, causing the boat to slow going up the wave and the net to drop, and then come up too fast going down the back of the wave. On that pull, there was little or no fish in the net. We then had about a week of reasonable catches and were busy cleaning and salting the catch, as there was no refrigeration aboard this boat. We encountered another storm, and no nets were set out for five days.

We had three good days of fishing and then got the message that another big storm was coming. The Captain decided we would wait out the storm in the harbor at St. John’s, Newfoundland. Other captains had the same idea, so we had to wait in line before we could load up the salt he ordered. It was a matter of going off the boat and a couple of hundred feet on the dock to the warehouse door, then halfway back through the huge building, hoisting a hundred-pound sack of crystal salt onto your shoulder, sometimes wrapping your arms around it, and walking it back to the boat. Three of the crew were asked to haul all that salt. We waited three days in line and were not allowed to leave the boat. There were possibly 50 boats anchored in the harbor waiting out the storm, with fishing vessels from ten different countries as, at that time, there was only a four-mile offshore limit. One of them was a Russian factory ship, a couple of hundred feet long, with five different trawlers tied up to it, all anchored in the harbor, waiting out the storm as well.

We headed out to sea, but the waves were still too big to set the nets. We headed towards Halifax, and after the sea calmed, we fished for a couple of days, though not with much success, always heading for the Maritimes. When we got back to Halifax and were about to get paid, the Captain did not offer any of the money for the catch and deducted most of the food that we had on board between the three of us. I looked around Halifax for a job for four or five days and then decided to head back to Ontario. I went to the train station and found out that my father’s railroad pass had expired, so I decided to hitchhike. I had almost a dozen different rides before I got back to Toronto.

I went to Miller Paving’s yard and found out that my uncle was coming back to the yard and was unloading the salt at the terminal in Toronto. I was going to wait for him, as it was a Friday, and I could hitch a ride the last 100 miles up to Coldwater. As I was walking around the yard, a guy hollered, “Back that truck into the wash rack!” I figured he was hollering at someone on the other side of the building. He hollered even louder with a few swear words at the beginning and end, and when I didn’t move, he yelled, “Do you not understand English?” I replied that I did understand English and headed towards the truck. It was a Freightliner with a tank and pup trailer attached.

I had to move the unit back and forth a few times before I figured out which way to turn the steering axle to make the pup begin to turn toward the wash building. After another dozen shifts back and forth, I finally got it aligned with the entrance of the wash rack building, backed it in, and shut it off. When I came out, I hollered over to him, “I suppose you want me to wash it as well?” He came over in a huff, obviously to give me a dressing down for not doing what I was told when he hollered at me. He said, “You don’t work here; what are you doing in the yard?” I told him I had checked in at the office and was waiting for my Uncle Mel to return so I could get a ride with him up to Coldwater. He said Mel had been with Miller Paving for more than twenty-five years and asked if I was looking for a job. I told him I had just returned from Nova Scotia and hadn’t had time to look for a job. He asked if I had a Chauffeur’s License. I told him I had a “Farm Help” license to drive a truck from Saskatchewan and an expired Ontario driver’s license. He said, “Get into that ‘bobtail’ over there, and we’ll get you your license pretty quickly. If you can back a truck, trailer, and pup into the wash rack on the first try, you can work for Miller Paving. I’ll have it washed for you come Monday morning.”

I spent nine months working for Miller Paving, covering the runs that my uncle Mell had previously handled, including many jobs up in Northern Ontario. I literally lived in the truck. I picked up pillows from old couches abandoned on the side of the highway and used them to make a comfortable bed across the passenger seat area. I ate at truck stops, took no weekends off, and was paid a bonus based on a ton-mile rate. I took one weekend off and had a delivery to Northern Ontario. Since home was only a few miles off Highway 400, which went through Coldwater, I decided to park the unit alongside the house and drive my bike to a party back at the lake. It rained heavily all weekend, and when I returned home on Sunday night, the loaded tanker and pup had sunk into the dirt beside the house because there were no eavestroughs on that side of the house. It took three big tow trucks to get it out without damaging the tanks or the house.

On another trip to Northern Ontario, while coming down a long hill into North Bay on the way home, I had Jacob’s Brake really heated up, and the exhaust was popping down the hill. As I was going down the main street, a convertible Metropolitan with a nice-looking blonde in a mini skirt pulled up alongside the tractor unit. I dumped in the clutch, revved the engine to high RPM, and engaged Jacob’s Brake, which really popped and rattled, causing her to stop right in the street. As I looked back in the mirror, the golden letters of the MAHAR shoe store's glass were falling onto the sidewalk. There had been a man sweeping the sidewalk who must have noted the license number from the back of the pup. By the time I returned to the office in Toronto, they had phoned the insurance company, and the records of my driver’s license showed that I was not yet 25 years old and, hence, not covered by insurance. As a result, I was no longer working for Miller Paving.

I then drove the old car I had bought from my uncle's home. It was badly in need of an engine overhaul because every time you filled the gas tank, you had to add two quarts of oil. I bought a big Oldsmobile “Rocket” 455 cubic inch engine and mounted it in a 1956 Ford sedan. The problem was that if you weren’t careful with the acceleration, it would twist the driveshaft off. The first time it happened, it was at the back by the differential and only resulted in no power, but the next time, it was at the front, and the driveshaft went back under the rear wheel, nearly turning the car over before I could stop it.

One night, at the drive-in, I was the second car leaving and soon became the first in line heading west. There was a raised area in the road and a cut for the railroad on both sides. Knowing there was a train scheduled around midnight, I made a cautious approach. When I saw it was clear, I accelerated quickly and, obviously, twisted off the driveshaft. It got caught on the railroad tracks, ripping the back wheels, trunk, gas tank, and part of the frame of the car. By the time I recovered from the impact and looked in the rearview mirror, sparks were flying from the back of the passenger area, dragging along the road, and I saw the gas tank was on fire, followed by a big explosion.

I retrieved the engine and mounted it in a 1958 Mercury with a trailer hitch. I loaned the car to a buddy to haul some stuff up to his father’s cabin at the lake. Unfortunately, a brick truck, going too fast for the curve, went head-on into my friend’s car, killing him and destroying the car and my big engine.

I then got a job working for a local survey company and worked my way up from an “axe-man” to a “chain man,” then to a “transit man,” and eventually to running the crew, handling all field notes, drafting, and drawing plans for a cottage subdivision. We eventually worked on contracts for the Department of Highways.

We completed a job with closing within aminute angle on a 16-mile closure. This brought a crew of office staff to our office, who wanted to see all of the field notes. They saw that I had made only two temperature measurements at the beginning and end of each entry, with some measurements being a few thousand feet apart. Normally, dozens of temperature corrections would be required for coefficient expansion and contraction due to the change in sunlight. I explained that the reason for this was that we did the centerline of the roadway at night, and the two measurements were taken at the same temperature. We conducted the survey using flashlights, could see cars coming for miles, and used short cement nails in the pavement for each measurement, illuminating the string of the plumb bob with the flashlight for the transit alignment angle readings.I explained that we had placed the holes to set up the new 18 holes on a golf course. Instead of paying for the survey, our boss made a deal for us to have free use of the golf course for the summer. We changed our work schedule to work from 8:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m., slept until 10:00 a.m., and then hit the links until near supper. This went on for most of the summer, and it certainly improved our golf scores and made the survey work a lot better, as we could produce a higher level of accuracy.

We were working in the Windermere area of the Muskoka District, and when winter came, there was a lull in surveying work. Our boss was intent on laying off the crew, so I took a job looking after the fires at the Windermere Lodge. There were four buildings, and I had to keep the furnaces filled with cordwood. I had a great room and ate the food from the freezers, preparing it in the big kitchen. When the lake froze, there was no snow on the ice for over two months. When it did snow, the wind mostly blew it clear, so I entertained myself by skating for miles almost every day.

The chap who owned the lodge came up to check on me and the buildings. He entertained me with war stories and mentioned he had license number "One." He planned to switch the floats on the Cessna 185 after buying skis on his next trip. He said he had a license restriction and needed someone with him on all flights who could land and take off, and he offered to teach me how to fly the airplane.

I started a fire in the hangar, and since it was not insulated, it only took the chill off the inside of the building. He directed me to install a big winch system above the aircraft that he had previously purchased. It was an electric winch system with a control on a long wire. I built a big platform, hung it from the rafters, and hooked the winch cable to the rafters at the top of the ceiling. The winch pulled itself up to the platform. I had loosened all the bolts on the pontoons, and when he arrived, we had the pontoons off and the skis installed in a couple of hours. He used the winch to move them to each side by spiking a pulley to each side of the hangar. He figured it would take him several trips up from the city, and on the same day, the aircraft was sitting on the ice in front of the hangar. We fueled it up, checked the oil, and he taught me what to look for during a walk-around inspection of the aircraft.

I spent the winter learning to fly, and that will make another story. I kept the fires going and went back to work surveying when the staff returned to the lodge. We completed two more contracts for the Department of Highways, and I had finished my application to join the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, awaiting notification on when the next troop for training would form.

In the fall, we received a contract to survey and lay out the lots for a 400-lot subdivision north of Port Severn, around a couple of lakes and abutting the Severn River. My crew and I worked out the plans from aerial maps, staked out the lots, and drilled holes by hand into granite rock to cement the pins in place. We contended with Massasauga rattlesnakes in the scrub juniper by wearing snake boots and using cheap metal fish rods with about four feet of steel rods. When we heard the buzz of the rattles, we would thrash the bush until we killed the snake, minimizing the risk of bites from these highly venomous snakes. I drew up the subdivision plan, made individual lot plans for all 400 lots, and registered them at the Land Titles office. The boss got a lot and another one overlooking the lake. When it was all complete, he signed each plot plan and decided to be generous by presenting each member of the crew with a $25.00 check. I returned the check with my resignation.

The corporal who processed my application advised me to get in really good shape before training to make it easier. We had a big snowfall early in the fall, so I strapped on a pair of snowshoes and took my .22 rifle. I went hunting around the fields and bush for the next three months, spending 10 to 12 hours each day getting in top shape. As the snow deepened through the winter, I broke new trails, and the effort increased. I received a call instructing me to make my way to the Headquarters building in Toronto on February 9, 1961. I was sworn in and issued a train ticket to Regina, Saskatchewan.

 

Learning to fly and getting my pilot license

I got my pilot's license back in 1958, and 66 years later, I still have it as long as my medical passes. I have knocked a hole in the air for just under 7,000 hours as pilot in command, endorsed on 19 different aircraft, with the largest being the twin-engine Douglas DC-3.

I applied to get into the RCMP AIR Division, but nobody was retiring, and they were not buying any more aircraft until I aged out. I figured that I would get my helicopter license to improve my chances if they acquired helicopters. I got fifty hours of helicopter time and practiced doing autorotations from a couple of thousand feet by dumping the collective, which allows the rotor blades to build up speed. When you get close to the ground, you pull it back up, and the energy in the blades allows you to stop your descent and land softly. I was able to do it from 1,000 feet and land softly, with enough energy to lift and turn it slightly.

I suggested that we should try one from 500 feet, but he said that would only give you two choices. I asked him what my two choices were, and he told me possibly the hospital and the morgue. He explained that the only way you could survive is if you have about 165 miles an hour forward speed. I said that if the engine quits at 500 feet, you only have those two options. I flew back to the base and decided that I would stick with the fixed-wing and do no more flying in command of a floppy-wing aircraft.

Working at the Windermere Lodge on Lake Rosseau and keeping the fires going just meant putting a couple of logs in the furnaces of the three big buildings at night. In the morning, I would have to put in four or five logs, and they would last the whole day, so it did not take much time or effort. The owner of the Lodge and I became good friends, and we got his Cessna 185 transferred over from the floats to skis in one day. He decided to stay over and teach me how to fly. He had to have someone with him who could land and take off to accommodate the restrictions on his license. He supplied me with several books to read about flying and navigating.

At night, he entertained me with some of his First World War stories about flying over France from England and animated “dog fights” with the Germans. He spent World War II teaching flying for Canadian Air Force personnel and airmen from the allies at several bases in Canada, as well as some fighter training in England. He had bought the Windermere Lodge and, over about twenty years, built it up from accommodating just six guests to currently accommodating over 75 guests with the three buildings. Some people stayed most of the summer year after year at a reduced rate as they required very little cleaning of their rooms and used the facility as their summer cottage with all the amenities. He had written several books on flight instructions, and I was able to read them. He did not have a second copy, so when I got my pilot's license, he wished them returned. I ordered the flight manual “From the Ground Up” and still have it.

We did an oil change on the aircraft, and he showed me how to run the blow pot to get the engine temperature up under the insulated engine cover. He had wing covers that we had to remove so that we did not have to remove the frost buildup on the upper surface of the wings, as it dramatically reducedthe efficiency of the wings. Without the light wing covers, you would have to clean the wings by roping them with two people the entire length of both wings. It would take two people to do it properly. After getting the temperature up on the gauge in the cockpit, he fired up the engine and went about explaining and demonstrating all of the controls, as well as doing a very extensive walk-around and checking the control surfaces for freedom of movement and allowable movement. The aircraft had boards placed crossways under the skis so that they would not freeze onthe ice surface. He had shown me the day before the easy way of accomplishing that with wooden pry boards and where to place them to the best advantage. The lake had frozen over in a glare condition, and we had just a little bit of snow; the wind had kept it clear all winter. I had entertained myself byskating for miles almost every day, and I had done some ice fishing, catching pickerel, pike, and bass to augment some of my meals.

I got in the passenger front seat, and we taxied out onto the lake. He made a big issue about setting the altitude and remembering the exact altitude of the ice surface of the lake as he pointed out the ice surface acts like a big mirror and reflects the sky. The same thing happens with calm water, and you could come in for some very hard landings when you thought there was still a hundred or so feet of air when you contacted the surface of the water or, in this case, the ice surface when you thought you had another hundred feet to descend. He turned into the wind, and we took off. He explained the best climbing attitude, speed, and engine RPM to accomplish the best climb and attitude of the aircraft, then reduced the engine RPM back to cruise when we got to the desired altitude. 

He explained the difficulty with the ice surface reflecting the sky and not being able to determine the surface of the ice without taking that information from the altimeter. He did the first landing, and I was allowed to do the take-off. He had warned me about the precession of the prop when the tail came up and began to fly, how to watch the airspeed and anticipate the tail coming up, and the application of the right amount of rudder and aileron to keep it straight. He said it would be critical when you have just half of the runway width to keep it out of the lights during an airport take-off. He coached me down for the landing. Getting to the ice surface with the reflection of the sky was difficult to determine, so I kept a sharp eye on the altimeter before beginning to round out the descent. I watched the airspeed and kept it just above the stall speed, managing to get it down with a very slight bump by paying a great deal of attention to the altimeter. He allowed me half a dozen take-offs and landings, and they got smoother with each one.

He had put a clothes hanger wire around the axle on the left side and a hook out alongside the ski before we took off from the lodge. He took the red handkerchief from around his neck and threw it out the window, and we watched it as it went down to the ice surface. He said anybody can land and take off an aircraft, but the challenge comes when you do it in the right place. He swung around into the wind on his handkerchief, laying on the glare ice, and watched the altimeter until he was just a few feet off the ice surface, concentrating on aligning the left edge of the ski on the red dot on the ice. It took three attempts before he managed to hook the handkerchief. He cut the power and coasted to a stop. I got out and retrieved the handkerchief, ensuring it was peaked up on the ice and out of the way of the draft from our take-off run a couple of hundred yards to the side. I climbed into the right seat as he had not abandoned the left pilot's seat. He said that you had to know where both sides of the aircraft are when you get close to the ground to see if you know where the left ski is on touchdown.

We took off and circled downwind. When I turned into the wind, I could see the handkerchief from a long way back and made a straight-in approach. I touched down way ahead of the target and bounced over it, missing it on that pass. I pulled up, gained altitude, and came around again. This time, I could see the shiny marks left by the rudder on the bottom of the skis. I could see the nose of the ski on my side and adjusted my alignment over what I considered the distance I had missed on the first pass. I caught the handkerchief on this pass. He said, "I guess you know how to do a spot landing when you beat me by one pass from the right seat." We coasted to a stop, and I retrieved his handkerchief. We took off and toured the lake, spotting a pack of eleven wolves at the far end of the lake where they were finishing eating a deer in a small cove out on the ice. He said that he had a 30-30 rifle in the trunk of his car, and we would be back to get those buggers tomorrow as he could sell the hides to the tourists in the summer.

He pulled up to altitude and said I could take us home. I had spent the better part of the winter skating all over the lake, memorizing most of the lodges and big cottages, so it was easy to head directly to the Lodge. He was surprised that I could fly directly home after circling around on the lake for almost an hour. We landed, fueled the aircraft, and tied it down at the dock. He said we would take a couple of blankets to lay down on the ice and a couple of sheets to cover up with. He would circle behind the wolves, scare them out onto the lake, and I could shoot them for him. The very next day, we flew to where we saw the wolves. They were around another deer killed back in the bush. I was placed on the ice about half a mile offshore, and he took the airplane and did a bunch of circles behind the wolves. Eight of them came towards my blind and passed within about seventy-five yards of me. I shot five of them, then had to reload and managed to get the sixth one. The other two were well out of range for the 30-30. We tied them all together with a long rope and towed them back to the lodge on the glare ice.

We spent the next couple of days skinning the wolves in the furnace room, salting the hides, rolling them up in sheets, and putting them in the big cold storage reefer by the kitchen. We dragged the carcasses with the airplane back to where they had killed the deer out on the ice, figuring that the wolves would clean them up. Three days later, we flew over the area, and it was totally cleaned up.

We flew six more days off in different directions from Rosseau Lake, and I was able to impress him with my navigation skills until I had 20 hours of pilot-in-command recorded in my flight log. I had worked doing survey work and Department of Highways surveys in the area, studying road and topographic maps to do quotes on different contracts, so I was familiar with most of the Muskoka Lakes area. He went back to Toronto after a month. When he returned, he brought the exams for me to complete, and on his next trip, he brought me a shiny new pilot's license. I went back to the survey job in the spring, then got the call to join the RCMP and was off to Regina for training. I heard that he died in Toronto, and I did not find out about it for two years when I was back in Ontario on holiday and went to Toronto to look him up.

I did not have any opportunity to get any flying in other than as a passenger in Air Force Avro Lancasters during searches. They had two of them stationed at Torbay airport in St. John’s, Newfoundland, and they serviced them in Halifax, Nova Scotia. We used to bum a flight over to Halifax, return four days later, and tour the Maritimes while we were there. Most of the members stationed in Newfoundland were from the Maritimes, and a bottle of “Screech” rum ensured a free room in most of the parents' spare bedrooms, making it a reasonable three-day holiday that came up every second month if you could schedule it.

I ended up organizing observers for the search missions for lost hunters and some over-the-ocean searches for lost boats or boats in distress. The aircraft were set up with bubble windows along both sides of the fuselage, usually with seven crew members, and liked to have eight observers. When someone reported seeing something, the observers had a mic to the cockpit. Then all hell broke loose. They immediately pulled up with a number of “g” forces, killed two engines on one side, went full bore, and the two on the other side were feathered. Your stomach contents were forced up your throat, then the dive back to the supposed spot. This all started as they cruised at 200+ miles an hour. Most of the observers did not volunteer for the next search flight after a few of those maneuvers, and I was looking for more observers to be available for the next call-out.

I did some flying when I got to the Yukon and gained a lot of mountain flying experience, helping out the government flights in assessing different forest fires. I did a lot of photography in Dawson City, taking pictures of the caribou migration and doing herd counts when they went over into Alaska in the spring and their fall returns to see what the health of the herds was. When we were in Watson Lake, I organized a flight school to come up to train a dozen pilots. The flight school came up from Edmonton, and I helped out as they brought two aircraft up. One pilot returned, and I helped with the cross-country training. All twelve of them got their pilot's licenses. Then, I purchased my own aircraft when I was transferred to Fort McPherson and flew it all over the North. The longest cross-country flight was from Fort McPherson to my hometown of Coldwater, Ontario, about 90 miles north of Toronto. By the time I got back to Fort McPherson, I had 10,000 miles under the wings. There were a lot of planned ups and downs when it flew at 114 miles an hour and had four hours of fuel on board.

 

Hunting and Fishing in The Yukon



For most of my life, I had been hunting and fishing, and when I went to Newfoundland, you could shoot one caribou. With the proliferation of introduced moose, you could shoot three moose with your one license as they were trying to reduce the moose population. I shot a lot of ptarmigan, ducks, and geese. For a while, I was doing a lot of skeet and trap shooting and won for all of Newfoundland and went to Nova Scotia to compete in the Maritime finals. I won the competition and the first prize, a double-barreled Beretta “perreli” shotgun that I had never fired for skeet, and a fully engraved German shotgun for the Trap competition. When I was being interviewed by the television station at the end of the shoot, the interviewer questioned me on how I could take the competition with a full choke barrel. I responded that if you point a Browning in the right place, you are sure to win. About two weeks later, I received a gold tie tack of a Browning shotgun from the president with a letter saying that the televised interview got a lot of coverage States-side, and they could not get that sort of advertising no matter how much they paid.

I competed in shooting when I was in training, and my name appears on the McBrine Cup for the highest cadet score. I assisted the firearms instructor in helping some of my troop become proficient with revolvers and rifles. When I was in the Army Cadets, I won the .22 rifle competition for Eastern Canada, which qualified me to go to Bisley, England. I have a badge for the “highest score in the unit” that I have on my shooting jacket. We were using .303 Lee Enfields and doing a run-up from 1000 yards to 100 yards and firing five rounds at each yardage.

When we were in training, there were a number of members who had joined from the Newfoundland Rangers and the Newfoundland Constabulary getting their indoctrination training, and I instructed a few of them. When I got transferred to St. John’s, Newfoundland, I was appointed to be the Musketry Instructor for the “B” Division. I would load up the “Pop & Dogger” range in the old 16-passenger van and drive to the individual detachments, locate a gravel pit in the area, set up the range, and conduct the annual shoot so that they did not have to leave their detachment area. When I went to the Yukon, I was appointed to do the same thing.



During the annual shoot over the years, I got four different certificates signed by different Commissioners for shooting “Possibles” with a rifle and revolver. To explain what a “possible” is, everyone is familiar with the “bullseye” on the target. Within the “bullseye,” there is a “CX” ring. To qualify for a “possible,” all ten shots must be inside or touching the CX ring. I got two of them framed, and it cost me $60.00. The others are in some of my collection of goodies. When I was in the Yukon, we had a friendly competition with the Alaska State Police. Every other year, we would go to either Anchorage or Fairbanks, and in the opposite years, they would come to Whitehorse, and we would host them. It was not fair competition because we also had to compete on their “drinking team” as their vice squad took us around to the different bars. When we arrived, their show of the night was started. Five liquor establishments later, we had to be on the range by 9:00 a.m., and we still managed to get the highest scores both in the Yukon and Alaska.

Before the Emergency Response (ERT) team was started, I was on the “Sniper-Counter Sniper” team, and we had to submit a crow target once every two weeks. Failing to submit your target fired at 250 yards meant you were no longer on the team. We were firing the Detachment .308s with a four-power scope. One of the members was ex-military, and his scores were always better than mine. I went with him to where he was shooting, and he was shooting at about a hundred and fifty yards. I invited him to come and shoot on my range, and he said it was too far. I got out the tape, and we measured it; it was two feet over the 250 yards. He moved the cardboard box back two feet, and at the end of the month, he didnot bother to submit his target. I competed representing the Force at a great number of rifle and revolver meets and usually got the highest score.



When I went to the Yukon, the Staff Sergeant retired and took over the Fish and Game Department. He was intent on making big game hunting a big business for the “Outfitters” and wrote letters to all of the big game magazines, rifle makers, and archery manufacturers offering them a free walking hunt for one person. He canvassed the members to become guides, as we all had our first aid and were interested in hunting. They had ten horses and the camps for firefighting. I volunteered and guided Fred Bear of Bear Bows to a record Dall Sheep and the owner of one of the Sports Digest magazines to his Dall Sheep. He invited me down to Las Vegas to get my Desert sheep, and I could say that I had my “Grand Slam” as I had already had my Dall sheep, Rocky Mountain Bighorn, and my “Fannin,” which is a cross between the Dall sheep and the Bighorn. I went to Vegas, went out to his ranch, and by ten o’clock in the morning, the head and horns were at the taxidermist. The hardest part of that hunt was to avoid hitting all of the hikers that were in the hills.



Your Yukon hunting license entitled you to shoot a moose, six caribou, a deer, a sheep, an elk, a buffalo, a spring and fall grizzly, and the same for two black bears. There were always the nuisance bears at the dump and those that came into the settlement and were aggravated by the locals shooting them with their 30-30s and had to be destroyed. Having the guide's license, I got in touch with my father and invited him and my next-door neighbor to come to the Yukon for a once-in-a-lifetime hunt. I made arrangements with the only guide that I would bring his herd of horses out of the mountains if I could take my father and friend on a hunt on the way out. I sent my father an airline ticket from Toronto to Whitehorse. The day before they were about to depart, they got a map out and decided that it was too far, as neither of them had ever been out of Ontario. I was alone flying in, packing up the outfitter's camp, and bringing his horses out to Mayo. I was limited in the number of big games that I shot, only by the number of people to whom I could give away the meat because I had no means of storing it. I was living in barracks and did not even have a refrigerator and only a hot plate to boil water to make tea and coffee and heat up soup. When I was in Dawson City, the two single members were having our meals at the hospital and paying for them at a real good price. That was when they closed the Herschel Island detachment, and Ottawa decided that they would move all of the rations by police plane down to Dawson City and put the single members on rations. A lot of it was four and five years old, and a lot of the cans had burst in the aircraft at altitude.

About that time we had the Commanding Officer come for his summer holiday under the guise of doing an inspection. We cooked him up some porridge and served him bacon that was mostly fat and some dried eggs and powdered milk from the whole garage of supplies. We gave him the menu of what was planned for lunch and the pork and beans and bully beef and eight-year-old Christmas pudding for dessert. He declined, saying he was taking the Cplout for lunch. He went back to Ottawa, and a week later, we were not on rations, and the memo directed us to take it all to the dump. We notified the locals and stacked it at the entrance to the dump, and it quickly disappeared.

Each year, I shot a sheep and goat, and I usually shot the six caribou and gave it all to the senior Aboriginals living in the community. I went moose hunting with the local outfitter, and you usually passed up the ones that were in the willows below the road because of the difficulty of getting them to the vehicle. We came upon three bull moose in a willow patch below the road, and he said I could take the one with the big set of horns as he just wanted some moose for the family for the winter. We shot two of them. I struggled to getthe quarters to the truck and then the head, horns, and hide. I would lash the load onto the pack board and then lay down into the shoulder straps and roll over and struggle to my knees, make my way to my feet and to the tailgate of the pickup, and then unleash it and pull it up into the bed of the truck. 

When we got back to Dawson City, I weighed it on the Canadian Freightways scale, and there were1,880 pounds that I had taken eight trips to get to the pickup. The horns were 72 inches across, and it was measured by a Boone & Crockett representative.And I had the record of the largest moose from 1965 until someone got a moose in Alaska in 2013 that was two inches wider. I loaned the set of horns to the hotel in Watson Lake, and the hotel caught fire and was completely destroyed, and my record set of antlers was destroyed in the fire.



I fished with great success during my life and hunted most everything and kind of game animal in North America. I have caught a bluefin tuna weighing 850 pounds and over ten feet in length and I caught and released a striped blue marlin off Hawaii and a 40-pound lake trout. The largest char that I caught on a rod and reel was over 27 pounds, and I netted over a ton of char for dog food when I was at Coppermine. I ran dog teams for three of the eight years that I was stationed in the North, and we were expected to fish for most of the dog food as the government supplied very little dog food that was mostly used when on patrol, and you had to cook up a warm meal for them before you had your supper. We were catching northern pike, some char, and the cones and lauche (Mackenzie Delta white fish) that were netted for dog food at Fort McPherson.

One of the doctors came over to Fort McPherson from the hospital in Inuvik and wanted to go for a dog team ride. I told him that I would take them for a quick run and have them drop their stinking juicy stool. He said he had a really strong stomach and had attended a lot of autopsies, and strong smells did not bother him. At Fort McPherson, we fed them a lot of what we called “pit fish,” which was simply netting them and then putting them in a big pit, and they partly rotted, and the bones deteriorated a little, and you fed the chopped-up portions of the fish. The dog droppings are highly offensive to begin with, and when they are fed the pit fish, the smell is totally offensive. He wanted to experience a dog team ride as we had two teams, and he saw a number of patients at the nursing station and then was ready for his first dog team ride. I told him that I would take them for a short run, and they could dump their bowels and get rid of some of the smell. He insisted that I not bother taking them for a run as they had told him at Inuvik that the dogs go as fast as they can run when they first hit the trail, and he wanted to experience that. 

Getting out of the settlement was as much of a scary ride as he suggested, and when we hit the straight area going across the river, they slowed somewhat. He was sitting atthe bottom of the toboggan with canvas sides running from the front to the back. I was standing up on the back, enjoying the fresh air, and they began to drop their stool in a very forceful spray. The next thing I know, he was hanging off to the side, and I will assure you that he had a real strong stomach as he was heaving it as far as I had ever seen a person chuck it. Finally, he called for a halt to get a rest, regain some of his composure, and breathe some fresh air.

I have been to Haines, Alaska, seven times to fish for the five different varieties of salmon, four times when I was stationed in the Yukon. After I retired, I had a friend who retired after selling his trucking business and bought a big motor home. He and his wife went down to Drumheller, and she refused to go anywhere else in the new motor home. I told him about the good fishing in Haines, Alaska, and he invited four of his friends to accompany us. Everyone took turns driving while the rest played cards, and one slept. Three days later, we were in Haines buying a three-day fishing license for $11.00 U.S. You can possess six salmon stream-side and could continue fishing if you either canned them or froze them. We would catch them, clean them without the heads and tails, put them in plastic ziplock bags, and then drive back into Haines to put them in the Styrofoam chests and the hardware store freezer before going back out fishing. We rented motel rooms and ate at the local restaurant. By the beginning of the third day of constantly fighting salmon in the fast-flowing Dyee River, most of the fishermen could hardly raise their arms. We did catch and release on the other varieties of salmon, and periodically, you would get a King Salmon hooked. We were upstream from a bridge that had a center support pier, and you had difficulty directing it on the shoreside of the pier, often having to cut the line to save it because you could not turn a 59 to 80-pound King Salmon when it headed back out to sea. There was no limit on King Salmon in that river because they were trying to discourage them from spawning in that river since they ruined five or six other salmons' nests when they dug up the gravel to lay their eggs. Norm and I made three separate trips that year with his and my friends, and the most we brought back was 285 Sockeye Salmon, which were still frozen when we got back to Sherwood Park. We shared the cost of the fuel withthe guests, so it made for a pretty affordable fishing trip.

While at Carcross, I fished off Skagway in the Gulf of Alaska and caught a number of halibut weighing in excess of two hundred pounds. I believe that the record is just over 500 pounds. I went with a chap that I befriended who lived in Skagway with his wife, and he had a big fishing boat. His job was to go either up or down the White Pass and Yukon Route Railway in an eight-cylinder Speeder to inspect the telegraph lines that were part of the NORAD backup defense system coming out of Alaska. To save him a lot of mileage, he would bunk in one of the spare bedrooms in the vertical log building that we rented for a detachment, and then he could go back down to Skagway the next day.



I made the rounds to the stores and restaurants and got any of their out-of-date chickens or saved the spoiled chickens. I would hang a five-gallon bucket with a very tight lid with my chickens stuffed with rocks so they would sink quickly to the bottom. I would hang the bucket in a tree in the sun for a few days to really ripen them up. We would anchor the boat and fork a few of them overboard, hook a bit of the ripe chicken on the hooks, and lower them down to where the really smelly ones were on the bottom. Sometimes, we would have two of them on the lines at one time, and I would be hanging onto two rods while he worked on getting the anchor up and out of the way of the lines. The tug of war began to get them to the surface. He would shoot them with a .22 rifle because if you got one of them in the boat alive, they would more than likely beat the bottom out of the boat with their big bodies and tails flapping. I keep bragging that I am the only “Queen’s Cowboy” who has ever lassoed a giant squid that was 29 feet long and weighed 285 pounds.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Story Of The .219 Zipper Improved Rifle

Before I joined the force, I had an idea that I was going to become a gunsmith as I did all of my own re-leading for five different centerfire calibre rifles and attended a couple “gun smithing” courses and passedthe courses with honours.I was building up a collection of Winchester rifles of one of every calibre that they made a rifle for.I was working on refurbishing a 45-90 Winchester with a “High–Wall” action, and I was going to have the barrel “re-browned,” not “re-blued,”which is the normal finish to prevent rusting.I have since resold that entire collection of Winchester rifles.I had the barrel off the action as it was a high polished, shiny, hardened steeled action.About that time,the ”.218 Bee” bolt action “varmitter” fore-stock had cracked and broken, and I was going to replace that portion.I had the barrel off the “varmiter” to be able to more easily and better fit the wood to the barrel.I tried the barrel to see if it fit into the high-wall action and found that it was the same thread pattern, so the idea of being able to build up a real “varmiter” took over. 

After the Douglas “Supreme” heavy barrel was re-chambered tothe .219 Zipper, I then put a new face of the action with a smaller firing pin hole and smaller firing pin to help with pressure buildup and disfigurement of the primers with the big firing pin of the .405. Then I ran into a problem that there wasabsolutely no .219 ammunition available anywhere. To overcome this problem, I had it re-chambered again to “.219 Zipper Improved.”With that lengthening of the chamber,it allowed for about six more grains of powder than the 30.30 cartridge had originally.Then I could “neck–down” .30-30 cartridges andfound that after they were “fire formed,” they held six more grains of powder than the original 30-30 shape,which meant more “oomph” behind the 85-grain hollow point bullet.I have had it choreographed at just under 4,000 feet per second.So I can assure you there is no moss growing on the back of that bullet when I touch oneoff.

With about six more grains of powder, push the 85-grain hollow point bullet;if you hit a blade of grass, it upsets the path of the bullet seriously.At three hundred yards, I have several targets that are clover leaves with ten rounds.I take great patience in reloading the bullets so they perform really well.I weigh even the cases to get near matching weight.I have done a lot of “varmiting” for crows and groundhogs back in Ontario, and I have done a lot of competitive shooting.I had the idea that I could get every groundhog in a 100-acre field from one spot.

I shot in most of the local competitions, but the sixteen pounds of “Old Betsy” did not qualify because they had a limit of 12 pounds for anything up to .25 calibre.I would have to cut some portion off of the barrel and drill holes in the stock and the forearm in order to reduce the weight to get under their weight restrictions and qualify to win the shoot, so I have never modified it.I shoot and am always the highest score and tightest grouping, but I do not take any prize money home.

I managed to trade up the “J.Unertl” free-floating spring-loaded scope that has critical focus range finder rings with “windage” adjustment mounts.All you have to do is turn the rings until your target is in critical focus, read the yardage on the ring on the front of the scope and, adjust for the windage on the mounting rings by estimating the wind put the focused yardage on the elevating rings on the scope, settle down on putting the crosshairs on your target and let off the four-ounce pull on the trigger.I have consistently shot crows at 250 yards and all you get is a puff of black feathers and the wings circling down to the ground independently.Groundhogs have a tendency to go completely into a red cloud when they are hit.I did all of the woodwork on it, and the cheek plate is to fit my face where I hold a rifle, and a big lump of the French Walnut on the fore stock is rounded to fit your hand where the rifle balances that makes for easier carrying the sixteen pounds of a rifle.

I had taken it with me when I went to training in Regina and figured the gophers in the west would represent a bigger challenge, being a lot smaller target.Our troops were housed in barracks in “B” block and on the fourth story.The most use the rifle got was watching the Nurses sun tanning on the roof of the Grey Nuns Hospital half a mile away.Most of the troops were taking turns, lining up to check on the focus on the scope.With .25 cents a minute behind the scope, it is the most money that I have evermade to offset the cost of putting that rifle together.Of course, a few gophers in the west have goneto gopher heaven as well as the crows are not feeling that safe in the area of that rifle.One time, I took it to the range to sight in a .300 magnum Weatherby rifle that one of the members had beenwilled to him by his father.I took 25 shells that I had just reloaded with me.We sighted in the big mule of a rifle 200 yards, and he asked if he could fire the “varmitter”.I told him to see if he could try and hit that little white rock on the embankment out at 500 yards.His first shot hit it with a big cloud of white smoke.He begged to try it again and that begging kept up until I went home with a box of empty cartridges.He wanted to trade me straight across for the $3,000.00 Weatherby, but I did not need to have a mule for recoil in my collection, and I did not think that I had any need to go elephant hunting.

 

Brief Info On Some Events In Newfoundland



When I was posted to St. John's, I was put in the Criminal Investigation Branch, and it was not too long before I realized that I was the chauffeur for the chief investigator because he had lost his license for impaired driving. It got me to all the major crimes and murder investigations, and I was taking statements from witnesses and doing photographs of scenes and bodies because the Ident Branch only had one man for all of the Island. I guess they were happy with my work because I did that for about nine months. The Corporal was really pleased as it sure brightened up his files with scale drawings and photographs, and I made all the accommodation arrangements forwe were there for a couple of days. Sometimes, we had the suspect in custody, and it made sense with two policemen in the car on those occasions.

When we did not have a case going, I was detailed onto Highway Patrol and as the "Musketry Instructor." That meant I packed up the old "pop and dodger range" into a 16-passenger van and went from Detachment to Detachment and did the annual shoot so that the members did not have to leave their detachment area. Vic Lundrigan had been in Regina for his indoctrination training when I received the award for the highest score for a recruit for rifle and revolver. When I was posted to Newfoundland, he was in charge of highway patrol units for the island. They had some sort of deal with the Newfoundland government that no detachment would be short of manpower. I ran the Musketry Instruction for the three years I was in Newfoundland, and then when I went to the Yukon, they had me doing the same thing.

Being on CIB, we had four guys jump from a Russian fishing ship who wanted to join life in Canada. They had a man in the hospital who had an appendix operation, and the guard, the patient, the ship's doctor, and their communist communications officer came to the office and turned themselves in, declaring political asylum. We would just provide them transportation over to Halifax, and they would be processed with the Immigration Department from there. That was when things got complicated with a pea soup fog that prevented air travel. The hotels were full, and it was decided that we would have to put some bunks in the storeroom in the office and notify Immigration to send money to provide meals. The money was transferred to the bank in St. John's, and they also sent money for the hotel accommodation.

The ship they had come on had left the Grand Banks because of the heavy fog, so security became pretty lax. They spoke absolutely no English, and I was the fifth bunk in the storeroom. On the fourth day of confinement, I took them shopping atthe local Safeway store and turned the Immigration money for food and lodging over to them. They had never in all their life had so much money in their possession. They could not believe having a store so well stocked and everything that had a picture label on it, so they bought one of each. They bought one of every fruit that was available, and each one of them had a shopping cart heaped with food when we came back, so meals for them were forgotten as they kept sampling all of the goodies they had bought. They were most surprised by how much flavor our food had; even the tinned pork and beans were a marvel to them.

I could not believe that the doctor had never seen an orange, lemon, banana, grapes, pineapple, and half a dozen other fruits and vegetables they bought, so I had to show them all how to eat them and how to peel them. I even took them out to see their first hockey game. They could not believe that a man could travel so fast on ice on a set of blades. I was taken up with them for almost two weeks before the fog lifted, and they headed for Halifax. We filled pad after pad of pictures that I drew with the accompanying word in English, and they wrote in Russian. I made copies for them all, and it was a chorus in the room of them saying the English words back and forth, and they were starting to put sentences together before they left for Halifax. It was the most difficult thing for them all, trying not to say the word with a guttural pronunciation or sound.

With all the traveling around Newfoundland as a chauffeur (I was getting sick of the drunken Corporal who did not let up on his drinking at night), I volunteered to go relieving. The Force had an agreement with the government that they would be fully staffed at every Detachment, so when someone was off duty sick or went on leave, a member was sent to replace them until they returned. So I would be the second or third man, and sometimes I was the only man. I did that for about nine months until I had to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night. Every Detachment hada different layout. There were absolutely no lights in town at night, and it was overcast and total absolute darkness. I stumbled around trying to find the bathroom or the front door until I stumbled over the garbage can and then, shortly after, went back to bed.

The only places that I was not stationed or attended during a major investigation in all of the Island and most of the Labrador werePort au Basque, Cornerbrook, and Gander. I got to see Gander through a lot of smoke as I was on highway patrol at the time, and they had huge fires in that area. We were doing traffic control and then escorting a line of traffic through the fire area for a couple of weeks in and around Gander. We stayed in a motel and ate our meals in the local restaurant in the town of Gander. We blocked the road at night and did the escorting during the day. A lot of the traffic was trucks that were supplying food to the stores in St. John’s and the bigger centers around the Avalon Peninsula.

When I was relieving the Corporal at Nain, it was 30, and about 40 miles out, it was open water. The Newfoundland idea of winter gear was the second pair of pants and a canvas duct parka, galoshes over your ankle boots, and leather mitts with a wool liner. Even with a full set of long-johns underwear, I was still freezing my ass because of the high humidity; the cold penetrated everything you could wear. When it was time to have the Corporal return off leave, they brought him there with the single Otter and picked me up to go up to Frobisher Bay (now Iqaluit) to do a violent mental patient escort out to Montreal as they could not sedate him anymore in fear of killing him with the medication, and he was still too violent to be able to put him on a commercial flight.

I had been freezing my ass off at Nain for four weeks as you had to feed the dog team and patrol around the settlement as there was no crime to speak of. When we arrived in Frobisher Bay, I was met with members in beautiful long "down-filled" parkas, wind pants, mukluks, and gauntlets. The only thing that we had in common that was warm was the muskrat fur hat on our heads, and they were getting $6.00 a month more for "Isolation Northern Pay." We went to Montreal and then back to St. John's, and the first thing I did was put in a memo requesting a transfer to "G" division.

About three weeks later, I was in the C.O.'s office, and he wanted to know why I wanted to leave Newfoundland. I told him why. He told me to go out and keep the secretary company, and he would make a few phone calls to see what he could do for me. About ten minutes later, I was called back into his office, and he said the only place he could find open for a single man accommodation was Dawson City. I asked him where in hell Dawson City was. “In "G" Division,” he said. “It is in the Yukon, and he would put me in the radio room so I would not get any more court cases. When you get your court cases cleared up, you willbe able to drive there.”

In the middle of July, I headed out with my Rambler (which was fully Pullmanized) station wagon, pulling my trailer, boat, motor, and all my gear. Just sixteen full days later and 6,996 miles later, I arrived in Dawson City on the 16th of August 1964.







 

Learning the area around St. John’s, Newfoundland



Newfoundland officially joined Canada at midnight on March 31, 1949, and officially became Canada’s tenth province. Both England and the people in Newfoundland had been working on it for a number of years, and Joey Smallwood finally managed to get it approved and became the first Premier of the province.

Bringing up his name brings to mind an incident and my first meeting with him. I was doing a radar operation outside of St. John’s at night, and this black Cadillac coupe went through the radar far in excess of the speed limit. I chased it down, and the driver identified himself and stated that he was a pig farmer. I reduced the fine, and I did not hear anything about the ticket as the fine was paid. Evidently, there was some discussion in the legislature about the fairness of the RCMP, and Joey Smallwood got up in the house waving his ticket and said they are fair with everyone and no one is getting away with breaking the law. Of course, it got a lot of press, and shortly after, I was invited to a visit with the Commanding Officer at his office to explain why I ticketed the Premier of the province. I had the printout of the speed and said that I had been in the province for almost a month and asked him if he knew the name of the Premier of Saskatchewan. If he was doing radar at ten o’clock at night and a violator came through the radar, would he be able to tell me if it was the Premier if he had been in Saskatchewan for just two weeks? I went with him to the legislature, and he apologized to Joey Smallwood. Smallwood said it was not necessary as the point was made that the laws applied to everyone, and he thanked me for reducing the ticket on the old pig farmer as it showed the fairness of how the law was applied and helped make his point in the legislature. On the way out to the car, the C.O. said to keep up the fairness in your police work, and I only got a bad time from the members for ticketing the Premier of the province.

Up to that point, the people had been policed by the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary in St. John’s, and the Newfoundland Rangers policed the rest of the island and Labrador. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police took over policing Newfoundland and Labrador, and those who wished to “badge over” were welcomed. The City of St. John’s wished to be policed by their current Royal Newfoundland Constabulary as their members were afraid of the transfer policy of the RCMP and had homes established and families well settled. The Newfoundland Rangers had policed the communities around the isolated outports along the coast and settlements on the Labrador coast and welcomed an increase in pay and benefits and a good pension scheme. Most of them were hired because they filled the doorway of the recruiting officer, and education was not considered. Only on-the-job training was the extent of their knowledge of the enforcement of the laws of the land.

When I arrived from training in Regina, Saskatchewan, I was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Branch. I thought that was a pretty good posting for a new recruit, as they handled most of the major investigations. The other member,whoaccompanied me on the long drive from Regina, got posted to Harbour Breton on the south coast of the Avalon Peninsula. It turned initially to be a great assignment, but I was soon to learn that I was to be the chauffeur for the Corporal who had lost his driver’s license for impaired driving. There was only one CIB section on the entire island, and they handled all the major crimes all over the island.And I was to drive him to wherever there was a suspicious death or major crime.

There was only pavement in St. John’s and Corner Brook, and the rest of the roads were gravel. They were beginning to build the Trans-Canada Highway across the island. It meant loading up a number of spare tires on rims, getting into coveralls, and heading out to the different points anywhere there was a major crime to be investigated, and I would be changing the tires when necessary there and back. The tires at the time were two-ply with a four-ply rating, and with the miles of gravel roads maintained by graders, the wear slivers of metal from the blades seemed to always end up in the tires of the vehicle I was driving. I began taking pictures of the crime scenes, and having worked for two and a half years doing survey work in Ontario, doing up plans of the lots we surveyed, I did the scale drawings and was allowed to take witness statements. It meant that I got a lot of good court time introducing the photographs and plan drawings for the court proceedings, which added a great deal to his investigative reports. It meant that we got to every settlement throughout the island except Corner Brook and Port aux Basques in the next three years that I was stationed in Newfoundland and Labrador.

When not away on a major investigation, I was assigned to highway patrol and also became the “Musketry Instructor” for the “B” Division. I had a sixteen-passenger van available to me. I loaded up the “pop and dogger” range and went from detachment to detachment, conducting the annual shoot. The ex-members of the Newfoundland Constabulary and Rangers did not have any firearms training and had never fired a revolver, and some had never fired a rifle, as they only had a “nightstick.” So, giving them revolver and rifle training and an introduction to tear gas was a difficult task that became one of my jobs. The training also included cleaning and oiling the revolver and maintaining the rifles. Trying to teach a novice shooter how to hit a target was a difficult job when they had no intention of ever using the revolver or rifle in their service. They showed more interest in the new batons that extended, as they had only been familiar with the nightstick.

The Newfoundland government had an agreement with the Force that the posts would be manned at all times. Before Confederation, the local policeman’s idea of taking holidays was going fishing out in the bay or hunting back of the hill from the settlement for ptarmigan or moose or caribou and was basically available in or near the community. Most of the current RCMP members were from the Maritimes or other parts of Canada, and they left the island for their annual leave. I was repeatedly assigned to different points while they were away, so I got to be the second man and sometimes the only man looking after the settlement for the duration of their absence and living in pretty basic accommodation, mostly in the spare room in the office, on a metal bunk and eating out locally for my meals. So, I got to live in an endless number of communities throughout the island and up the Labrador coast.

In the first week in St. John’s, I was on night patrol with an older former Newfoundland Ranger, and he was driving about 25 mph. The traffic was backed up behind the marked police car. I questioned him on why he was driving so slowly, and his response was that last night he had 25 cars behind him as they were afraid of passing a police car. About that time, a call came on the radio that there was a really big fight at the Topsail Inn, and all cars were to respond. He did not answer the radio call and report our location. I saw a sign on the side of the road that we were leaving Topsail and took the radio, indicating that we were just east of Topsail. He pulled off, turned around, and drove back to the Topsail Inn and did not get out of the car. I asked him if he was coming. He said, “You took the call; you can look after it.” He sat in the car, and I heard three other cars responding on the radio and were on their way to Topsail.

When I went through the door, it was bedlam. There were at least four different men fighting in different areas of the room, and there was a group of people up on the stage area with the tables overturned and throwing bottles and ashtrays at another group with an overturned table about the middle of the hall. I went toward two big chaps who were duking it out near the door and tapped the biggest on the shoulder, saying the fight was over; the police were here. He turned around, grabbed the front of my uniform and the cross strap that held up my duty belt and holster, and swung me off my feet. This was a fisherman who, for most of his life, had been pulling cold, wet netting off a fish trap, and his upper body strength was phenomenal. He, with the second hand, was swinging me around until the front of my uniform and cross strap broke away, and I crashed into a number of overturned tables and chairs. He came over and kicked me in the hip.

When I got up, one side of my uniform and leather cross strap were still in his hand. We exchanged a few body blows, and he held his arms high, making it hard for me to get a blow to the side of his head. He would periodically swing the leather cross strap and hit me with it, which upset me a little more. I went into a rapid number of body blows and forcefully raised my knee into his groin. He went down backward, and I rolled him over and managed to get his arms behind his back and put on the handcuffs. When I got up, I offered a few of his buddies a boxing match and got no takers. Most of the beer bottles and ashtrays had been flung back and forth by this time, and the other members started arriving. I took my prisoner out of the hall and put him in the back seat of the police car. I found out from my ex-ranger that this guy was the big bully in the area, and he was really surprised that I was able to arrest him. I said to him that in training we learned that we could never afford to lose a fight, and I thanked him for his great support and assistance.

During the time I was stationed in St. John’s, we moved from the old barracks to the U.S. military base that they had closed. We moved from Kenna's Hill to Fort Pepperrell and from 18 members in the barracks to two-man rooms. The Identification Branch was at the other end of our building on the lower floor, and the mess was right below our rooms with two good cooks. I began helping the Sgt. with the identification services and was able to have access to the darkroom for processing my black-and-white pictures. All I had to do was buy the photographic paper. He was alone, and the member who was in Ottawa developed every malady to avoid the transfer to Newfoundland. I managed to identify a fingerprint at a major break-and-enter at a warehouse, which led to his arrest and big jail time for one of the local criminals. I was periodically sent to the local crime scenes to take pictures and scale drawings if the Sgt. was off on another point.

I started with another member, sleeping in different warehouses. One night, the culprits backed through the big doors, and five of them were loading perishables in the back. I sneaked out after I had phoned the office for backup. I closed the back of the box and announced that the police were here and the fun was over, and then locked myself in the truck and turned the key off when I saw the flashing lights coming. The dog master was one of the first cars, and his dog got to chew on one of them just as he ran out of the warehouse. Two were still in the back of the truck when I closed the doors on them, and two were found hiding in the bathroom in the warehouse. So we cleaned up the “Muddy Pond Thieves” in one night.

Most of the ex-Rangers were known for their size but not much brainpower. I was sent by one who was in charge of the filing room to retrieve his watch at his residence. His wife served him soup for lunch, and he usually took his false teeth out and put them in a glass of water. I went to his home and asked his wife for his watch, and she said she had no idea where he put his watch and invited me in to help her look for it. I immediately saw that he had put his watch in the glass of water instead of his false teeth.

I handled the tear gas training, and they sent me one shell of a new variety of gas. Instead of aggravating your eyes, nose, and sweat glands, this was supposed to affect your nervous system associated with control of your bladder and muscles of the anus. We had a riot at the Queen’s Penitentiary, and I was called in to help as the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary had no tear gas. The prisoners were burning furniture in the courtyard. On a loud hailer, I advised them that they had five minutes to return to their cells, and it only brought jeers and them throwing burning pieces of furniture up to where we were standing on the top of the wall by one of the guard houses. After the five minutes were up, I fired the powder over their heads, and it settled amongst them. In about five minutes, the front of most of them had a darkened area at their crotch, and then there was a mass exodus with them fighting to get into the doorway that led to their cells and a bathroom. There never was another riot at the penitentiary in the three years that I remained in Newfoundland.

My partner in my room was a recruit right out of training, and I was able to introduce him to the Nurses' Residence in St. John’s as I had been going with a nurse who caught TB and was in the sanatorium. He accompanied me on most of my diving expeditions. I was doing a lot of trap and skeet shooting at the time, and he tried that a few times. We went hunting ptarmigan together. He and I were sleeping at different warehouses to see if we could catch some criminals, and we worked together on highway patrol. I was away doing the Annual Shoot and came home to sleep, and he went on patrol with another member as they had a prison break, and they caught them trying to break into a rural hardware store. He went to the police car to call for help, and while he was away, they jumped the other member and kicked him into unconsciousness. When he returned, the ringleader shot and killed him.

I accompanied his body to Ottawa, gave the eulogy at his funeral, and stayed with his parents. What I did not know was that he was writing his mother and telling her of all the good times we had together. His dad was a Baptist minister, and he was their only child. They sort of took me on as their son, and she wrote me letters, and they came to Newfoundland and visited. He had retired, and they bought a truck and camper and began touring down to Florida in the winter and places they missed in Canada.

Royal Newfoundland Yacht Club



When we finished our dive, we went into the man-made harbor of the Yacht Club facilities, and they were lowering a huge outboard motor onto a boat with a winch truck. We watched them lower it onto the back of the boat, fix up the controls, plug in the fuel line, and start up the engine. They unhooked the lines that tied the boat to the dock and began to back it away. As soon as the front of the boat was clear of the dock, it accelerated backward to the middle of the harbor, and the motor tilted up and then went off the boat and into the water, breaking all the lines and cables that held it, and disappeared into the ocean. The man paddled the boat back to the dock, and we introduced ourselves as we were still in our wet suits. He was the President of the Royal Newfoundland Yacht Club, and he said that the boat was their brand-new rescue boat, and they had not arranged insurance on it yet.

Jim suggested that we could go down and hook the line from the tow truck on it and recover it right away without any cost. We went to Jim’s Volkswagen van, got our tanks and gear on, and got into the boat. The tow truck driver directed us to where he thought it went down. When we stopped, it was the end of the cable on the tow truck. When we went down, there was ahuge motor lying on the sandy bottom. We borrowed an old piece of canvas, rolled the motor onto the canvas, and got a rope attached to the skeg of the motor and up to the boat so that it would slide along on the cowling of the motor, and the winch pulled it over to the dock.

We attached the slings that they had used to lift the motor originally to the lift points on the motor, and the winch lifted it out of the water and lowered it back down onto the boat. This time, the owner was tightening the big levered security bolts onto the transom of the boat.

We were invited into the posh field house and hall to change out of our wet suits and have a round from the bar. They suggested that maybe we could recover some of the members' anchors as every boat in the club was on a picnic moored over by Bell Island, and when they went to leave, eleven boats lost their anchors in the rocky bottom as they got stuck and could not be lifted. We arranged to come out the next day, and they could take us over to the site, and we would raise their anchors for them as we had to recharge our tanks.

Early the next day, we were ferried over to Bell Island with several of the owners of the anchors. We dove in only forty feet of water and found a huge field of broken rocks and recovered ten of the anchors. One was in a deep crevice in the rocks, and we could not reach it to bring it up. The owner of the big outboard motor said they had the motor running as the cowling had prevented water long enough for the carburetor to drain, and no water entered the engine. They had to order in the ends and one of the cables, and no other damage to the nine-thousand-dollar motor.



Tying Up with Memorial University

The head of the Memorial University Marine Biology Section was Fred Aldridge, and he phoned us the next day and asked if we would be interested in collecting some specimens for the Memorial University as he had a budget and would pay us for good specimens. He said he had several tanks they have for the public to view while visiting the University. He had a list of five specimens that were rare at most university tanks. We said we would have no trouble getting him prime specimens on their own little rocks. Jim had been working on getting his degree in Marine Biology and could identify all of the invertebrates as he knew the names all that were associated with a shale formation, and it seemed that each one had its own piece of rock. He knew the names of everything that we encountered and was trying to familiarize me with all the different things we encountered on every dive. 

On a Saturday morning, we got the list of five from Fred and went out to Logy Bay, and in three hours, we were back with the five specimens, and of them we had four or five of them with different sizes. He gave us another list, and we did not even get out of our gear before returning with all on that list in duplicates and triplicates. He had a list of three more. We were putting on our gear and about to enter the water when he came out from behind a rock and said, "I have found a place for the new marine biology section, and it is your gold mine of specimens that has led me to the location."



The coastline in that area is possibly almost a vertical 600-foot face, and a big chunk of the face had separated from the shoreface that is over half a mile long and had gone out about 500 feet from the shore and has a hundred feet of water between a slipped rock and the coastal cliff. It is only about five miles out of the city of St. John’s and has good access down to the ocean via a small river valley trail that we could drive within 500 feet of the ocean.

He explained that they would be able to pump water into the viewing tanks from the depth where the specimens lived and not have to make up the salt water and chill it and save a lot of work, effort, and expense back at the University. Today, true to his word, that is where the entire Marine Biology Section is located. I understand there is a plaque honoring Jim and me for finding the location for them. It was only five or six miles out of the city of St. John’s, and it had the biggest lobsters in the area because it was too deep for the lobster fishery boats as there was over a hundred feet of water in the middle and the lobster in that area had never ever been fished and they had all the natural food they needed.

Jim and I had chalkboards to communicate back and forth underwater, and I would see a specimen and draw a picture, and he would be able to tell me what the name of it was when we finished the dive and point it out in the books that he possessed.We were diving in that area one day, and the bottom was right at 60 feet. I noticed what I thought was a hot water tank. I noticed off to my right, made a small picture, and put the name of the hot water tank and “no rust” on my chalkboard.We surfaced a short while later and he asked what did I see.Jim was a Sgt. in the Army Intelligence section, and when I showed him my picture, he said.This is salt water, and a hot water tank without rust is not very likely;show me where you saw it.We returned to our path, and when he saw it, he wrote “DEPTH CHARGE” in big letters and then wrote, “MAYBE THERE IS MORE.”We found the second one and left the area.He looked after notifying the Navy and Air Force, and two days later, we were showing a crew of Navy SKUBA divers out of Halifax of the location of the depth charges.

They stood them on their ends and unscrewed the depth detonation end and then took the long strands of cordite out and we brought the empty tanks back to the beach for them.Jim had built a lift bag that was a waterproof canvas with a round area of about two feet of neck strands of parachute cord and a hook.We just hooked onto the contact clips on the side of the depth charges, hooked the second one onto the maze of cords, took our mouthpiece out, and put enough air into the lift bag neck until they were buoyant, and as we went up the air continued to expand and come out of the open bottom.All we had to do was tow them to shore on the surface.Two of the Navy divers each carried the live portion up to the surface and then to their vehicle, and they rolled the empty depth charge casing to the sides of their vehicle.That vehicle departed to go to the Airbase at Torbay and returned for the divers.They had not seen one of the lift bags in operation, and we gave them one so they could copy it and make some of them for themselves.

Evidently, during the war, a Canso bomber took off from Torbay Airport on a reconnaissance submarine patrol, and they spotted a German submarine taking on fresh water at our favorite diving site.They circled around, and in the meantime, the submarine was getting underway, and they lined up on its departure path and dropped the depth charges. One of them hit the hull of the submarine and bounced off, and neither of the depth charges went off as they were set to go off in 80 feet of water, and there was only 60 feet of water where we located them.One of them was dented on the end so the story was very truthful.

 

Yukon Flotilla 1967



In 1967, the Yukon Government Tourist Department decided, as part of celebrating 100 years of Canada, to organize an adventure-filled trip from Whitehorse to Dawson City on the Yukon River. They advertised in every city and every yacht club across Canada and the United States. They set a date and wrote it up, and people began to turn up with everything from inflatable kayaks to single-person canoes, some reasonable two-person and three-person canoes, sensible home-built river boats, and even a three-screw Chris Craft pleasure cruiser that accommodated six people.

I was one of four members chosen to be responsible for the safety and well-being of the participants, as I had already completed three trips down the Yukon River from Whitehorse to Dawson City. I had volunteered on the paddle-wheeler steamboat "Keno" on a trip to Dawson City, where we needed extra hands on board to help lower the smoke stack to go under the road bridge at Carmacks. We suited up in protective asbestos clothing to help lower the smoke stack and then raise it up quickly because we needed to navigate the Five Fingers Rapids shortly after the bridge and another big rapid down from that point.

When I was in the Yukon, I was the “Musketry Instructor” and ran the annual shoots and taught the use of the tear gas gun. We had trouble with the “hippies” using the six paddle wheelers on the dry dock down by the river in Whitehorse. They used the staterooms for accommodation, and it would take hours to check all the rooms on the five boats, as some of them had two or three levels of staterooms running along both sides of the boat and send them packing. They would hide after being forced to leave and come back to another boat. They were never going to be placed back in service, so I discharged several tear gas shells in each boat that were just the powder variety into the heating system ventilation of the riverboats, and they were not using the boats for accommodation for months. Some of them decided to camp on the decks of one of the boats and lit a fire in a portion of a forty-five-gallon drum. The deck of the boat caught fire, and three of them were totally destroyed before the fire department could put out the fires.

This prompted the sale of the "Keno" to the Klondike Tourist Association, and it was sailed down to Dawson City. It was decided to move the "Whitehorse" to the other end of town for a more convenient tourist attraction. They built a skid system for underneath the huge boat and hooked it onto two big D-8 Caterpillars. They managed to haul it until they encountered the pavement of the city streets and could not pull it any further. I was working traffic control that day for the move, and the power lines had to be cut to allow the mass of the boat to navigate the route, leaving most of the downtown portion of the city without power. There was much discussion on what could be used to make the skids more slippery. They jacked up one side at a time and greased the bottom of the skids, but that lasted about two lengths of the boat before the Caterpillars started skidding and marking up the pavement. I suggested using some “Ivory” soap flakes, and they bought out every box in town. They jacked up the skids again and sprinkled the flakes underneath. One Caterpillar started moving the boat, and people spread soap flakes in front of the skids, allowing the boat to go the remainder of the route without any difficulty to where it is still on display by the bridge that crosses the river to the residential area of Riverdale.

My other trip was with the head of the Forestry Department in Dawson City. He had a lifelong dream to travel the entire length of the Yukon River from near Whitehorse to where it empties into the Beaufort Sea. He asked me to accompany him in his boat, which he had built for the trip. Due to the extended distances between points where fuel for the outboard motor could be purchased, I built a fuel tank out of thin metal with baffles and cross baffles that extended almost the entire bottom of the riverboat and held hundreds of gallons of fuel.

He decided to launch it at Whitehorse due to the difficulty of navigating the short stretch from Nares Lake and through Miles Canyon and then having to take the boat out of the water to get around the hydroelectric dam just upstream from Whitehorse. The total distance of the river from the source, a glacier near Atlin, British Columbia, to where it flows into the Bering Sea is 1,982 miles. We planned on using the outboard motor to shorten the time involved in making the journey. When we had to sleep, we pulled up the motor and drifted along with the current. We took turns navigating and sleeping in the 24-hour daylight.

In central Alaska, we encountered many miles of meandering river, but still with about a six or seven knot current going with us, allowing us to cut all the corners as close to the bank as we dared. He sold the boat and motor to the Inuit community at the mouth, and we flew to Fairbanks, then to Whitehorse, and drove back to Dawson City with my vehicle, having used up all my annual leave for that trip in the fall of 1964.

Getting back to the “Yukon Flotilla,” we organized a meeting with more than fifty boat owners and their passengers and had maps of the different portions of the river that we figured were dangerous spots. I explained the danger of the strong winds that would result during the crossing of Lake La Barge and suggested that everyone stay close to the western shore because of the “catabatic” winds that would come down the mountainsides as the sun moved further north, cooling the mountainsides and causing the air to sink into the valley all along the 30 or so miles of the narrow lake. I suggested that if they wished, they could get the book that the riverboat captains had written, which had all the maps and danger spots outlined and directions on how to navigate the river and read the water when traveling with the current, including where a lot of the shallow water sandbars were located. I displayed the copy that I had purchased.

Every boat was given a number, and we had records of everyone’s name, address, and contact point of next of kin in the event of a tragedy or death en route. If you had fishing gear to augment your food supplies, there were salmon, lake trout, Arctic grayling, and northern pike to be fished for in the river. Departure time was set for noon, and the four members of the RCMP were charged with the responsibility of getting them safely to Dawson City. The traveling distance from Whitehorse to the margin of Lake La Barge is 82 miles, our first camping spot. The other campsites were chosen to accommodate at least 50 fires, and they were all to be extinguished properly at every site.

They were reminded that they needed provisions for at least fifteen days on the river, as the only re-supply spot would be at Carmacks. With much horn-blowing from people at the site, the more than fifty boats of all manner of watercraft set out from Whitehorse atthe beginning of our Yukon River trip. It was arranged that with the two freighter canoes, one would lead the group, and when they reached the next chosen campsite, they would check them in as they arrived, while the second canoe would follow the pack and offer assistance to anyone in distress. When we arrived at the campsite at the margin of Lake La Barge, the question arose whether we had seen boats number 12 and 13, as they had not arrived, and people were wondering if we had encountered them en route.

We assembled a group and questioned if anyone had seen them. Three different people said they had seen them in the middle of the lake and felt they were on the east side, contrary to what they had been cautioned. As I had described, the winds had picked up, and the last quarter of the lake had fairly high waves, with the winds coming from the mountains onto the east side of the lake.

I got my spotting scope out, and sure enough, the two canoes were in the lee of some rocky islands, paddling furiously against high waves and a strong wind about ten miles away. We took all our camping gear out of the freighter canoe, and I headed out into the rough water on one side of the canoe, struggling against the waves and wind from the east. I had to cut across the waves to go directly south, taking on a lot of water from the spray.

When I reached them, they were continuously paddling to stay in the lee of the rocky islands. I had them come alongside, allowing them to rest while the outboard motor kept us in relatively calm water. I could only take their supplies to lighten their canoe and their 13- and 14-year-old children with the promise that I would return for the parents, who were left with the promise that I would land their supplies at the campsite and tow one of the canoes. I asked why they had tried to travel on the east side of the lake despite my caution. She said everyone else was going along the west side, and they wanted some privacy on the big lake. I had the kids get inside one of their tents to stay dry while I wore a raincoat with a hood and pants to keep myself dry. Returning was easier as I was partly going with the waves, though I still took on some spray with the wind gusting at 40 to 50 mph. I got back safely to the parents, landed them at the campsite, and found that others had set up their tents and had a campfire going. I enjoyed a very late supper.

With the 24-hour daylight, we had people ready for the next day’s paddle at 4:00 a.m. They were upset that they couldn’t travel ahead of the escort boat because we needed to identify the next campsite at Hootalinqua. We didn’t want the members scattered along the seemingly endless miles of the Yukon River. The Yukon Tourist Department had issued camping permits only for points with adequate areas to accommodate the number of campers and had arranged for dry, pre-cut firewood at the campsites. The last job of the members at the back of the convoy was to go around with a five-gallon bucket and douse the campfires with enough water to ensure that the fire was completely out and the stones were cooled off. Sometimes, it took ten buckets of water hauled from the river to ensure the fires were completely out and the gravel was cooled. This task allowed the last to leave to enjoy some solitude during the Yukon River trip.

Our next campsite was at Big Salmon River, and everything went well. The paddlers were spread out and enjoyed their piece of the river in true solitude. We had some difficulty with the big Chris Craft as it dragged its anchors on the gravel bottom and in the ten-knot current. We tied a long rope to a tree up the shore and put the freighter canoe along the shore. The Chris Craft could come ashore to have supper with the group and fire and then go back aboard to sleep and return for breakfast on the shore. There was one incident where the boat encountered a sharp sandbar but was able to back off and find deeper water.

Our next campsite was at the mouth of the Little Salmon River. The Chris Craft was able to tie to the shore in the river, where the boat came against a vertical bank and in deep water, so they again joined the group for supper and breakfast. With five people on board, including four guests from a band, we had live entertainment each evening.

We all got underway in good time, but about three-quarters of the way to Carmacks, Chris Craft ran onto a sandbar and became stuck. I tried pulling it back upriver, but it didn’t budge. We were about 20 to 30 miles from Carmacks. I decided to go there and borrow some of the Forestry’s big high-pressure water pumps to wash the gravel from underneath the hull. Unfortunately, the owner had tried to free the boat while I was gone and had damaged all three props. Our second freighter canoe and members came back with their boat and two guys from Forestry. We tied onto the big boat, both forward and aft, and used the pump to blast the sand and gravel from underneath the hull. We cleared the entire length of the sandbar in less than an hour. We stayed tied to the big boat and towed it to Carmacks, where we maneuvered it to the boat launch area. The owner phoned to have someone drive his truck and trailer to Carmacks, and we took his number off the list.

During the evening, we held a group meeting and explained how we would control their movements through the Five Finger Rapids. The name comes from the four rocky islands that split the river into five channels. In the 1900s, explosives were used to widen the channel on one side, and the safest channel was the northwest one. This is followed by a big rapids named "Rink Rapids," after the captain who sank his paddle wheeler trying to navigate the Five Finger Rapids. This is considered the most dangerous portion of the Yukon River trip. I talked to the owner of the general store in Carmacks, who said he sold every article of camp food and set a record for one-day sales. He had been warned about the number of anticipated customers by the Tourist Department and had stocked up.

In the morning, we set up with my boat at the top and a rescue boat below if needed. I waved each canoe to begin the passage, and we managed to get everyone through the Five Finger and Rink Rapids without incident.

Our next campsite was Fort Selkirk, an abandoned settlement from the early 1960s. It had some of the residence buildings, school, church, weather station buildings to explore, and a large campsite. The distance from Carmacks to Dawson City was 260 miles. We next camped at Stewart River and met the Burien family, who mined and made a living trapping. The following day, we completed the last leg of the journey, arriving in Dawson City with everyone safe and tired. The last campsite was named Louse Town, where the Klondike River flows into the Yukon River on the south side. We had our final campfire there with the supplied wood.

Arrangements were made to have two buses and five or six semi-trailers to haul the boats back to Whitehorse. The participants had two days to tour Dawson City and enjoy the tourist attractions. Having spent two different postings to Dawson City, I knew most of the residents by their first names.

 

  

 

Dealing with The Cold Weather



Arriving at the new posting of Dawson City, completely unfamiliar with its history and needing to learn a new set of ordinances and how the laws of the land were to be applied, within twenty minutes of ending my long journey from St. John's, Newfoundland, some 6,996 miles and sixteen long days of travel, I was involved in assisting with the investigation of a serious hit-and-run accident. The young cyclist was in the hospital, and the drunken driver was in custody.

Learning the Detachment area required endless trips in every direction by car, plane, and helicopter. The distances were not just a few minutes away but several hours, with little to no habitation present almost everywhere. Dealing with hundreds of miles to the north and east and 100 miles to the border with Alaska, the spectacular height of the mountains was awe-inspiring. I had been in the Rocky Mountains in the Banff and Jasper area and thought they were truly special and spectacular mountains until I got to the Yukon.

Everywhere in the world, the tree line stops at about the 6,000-foot level above sea level (ASL). However, when considering that the valley floor was around 4,000 feet in both Banff and Jasper areas, that meant only about 2,000 feet of trees and then only about 1,500 to 2,000 feet of rock above the tree line. When I got to the Yukon, the valley floor was just 600 feet ASL, the tree line was around 6,000 ASL, and there were anywhere from 2,000 feet to Mount Logan, with an elevation of 5,959 meters (19,591 feet) of rock. There were five mountains on the side of Mount Logan that were spectacular.

I was determined to go out to Banff and take the Mountain Rescue course, and I was the coordinator for the Yukon for the four years I was there. I had three helicopter trips to Mount Logan to look for overdue mountain climbers. The mountain is only about 75 miles away from the Gulf of Alaska, with no weather stations in the area. Due to the high elevation, unexpected storms could result in two to three feet of snow in a day, easily stranding a mountain climbing party.

It was a matter of hiring a helicopter to do a search. When they were located, it usually meant the helicopter placing me on a ridge in the area and then ferrying them and their camp out to their vehicles or to where the snow ended in the valley. Then, they would come back and take me out. It was a lonely experience with my rifle and backpack, waiting for the helicopter to return.And when Icouldn't hear the sound of the helicopter in the thin air at that elevation,Iwould hope and pray that the pilot had a great geographic memory of where he had placed me to be able to take the mountain climbers to where they wanted to be flown. I had the pleasure of being up close and personal with the upthrust of rock that is the second-highest mountain in North America, led by Mount Denali in Alaska, which is 19,685 feet or 6,000 meters.

We had a lot of fires in the Yukon my first summer, and trying to get used to the sun being in the sky for over five months of perpetual daylight was a bit of an adjustment to your sleeping patterns and shift scheduling. I arrived in late August, and the sun went along the horizon in the North for a few hours and then back up into the sky for the rest of the 24 hours. We were trying to line up firefighters and handled that by parking the station wagon in the alley behind the bars. We had five liquor outlets: the liquor store and four bars with live entertainment.

The next thing was to run the other police car with the siren and lights going full blast up and down Main Street. Those we flushed out were invited to become firefighters and were placed in the station wagon and headed out to the fire line.

Five of these were taken out to join the fire crew on a forest fire that was southeast of Dawson City, about 20 miles away. I also conveyed groceries to the firefighting camp. They were fighting the fire with aerial bombers and pumping and spraying water from the creeks in the area. It was figured that the fire was endangering the community and needed more firefighters.

I hardly got back to Dawson City when we got a radio message that the firefighters that I had delivered had left the camp with a lot of the groceries and wanted them arrested if possible. I was detailed to be in charge of seeing if I could arrest them. I went to the camp and followed the track of the five of them. About five miles from the Forestry Camp, I spotted them in a grove of spruce trees at the top of a slight hill with a large fire going and cooking their dinner. I was contemplating how I was going to arrest five men as I only had two pairs of handcuffs.

My attention was taken up bythe sound of an approaching aircraft and the sound of the engines going into fine pitch. I was immediately lying on the ground behind a big tree about 100 feet away from the fire and the five men. I recognized that they had spotted the smoke and were about to extinguish the fire by dropping a load of water and chemicals. Knowing that the plane would be in a dive and going at 250 miles per hour, I lay on the ground behind this big tree to give me the best shelter from what I anticipated was going to happen. The roar of the plane went overhead, and then all hell broke loose with the orange water and flying broken branches going past me. Even with the protection of the tree, it ripped the back of my jacket and shirt off.

The problem of how to take five local Natives in custody was solved as they had all been standing looking directly at the approaching aircraft, and they all needed medical treatment. Some had pieces of branches stuck into them, and most were bleeding from their wounds. I managed to help remove the sticks and branches from their wounds and used a couple of slices of bread to take up the blood. I made bandages from parts of their jackets and shirts.

I had no trouble convincing them that it was only five miles back to the camp and about 10 to 15 miles to Dawson City through the bush and over or around a mountain. We would be able to get them to the hospital for further treatment with my vehicle back near the Forestry Camp. We took what canned food we could locate back to the camp, and I had them at the hospital within three hours. They got a month in jail when it all came to court, and I escorted them to Whitehorse on the scheduled flight a week later.

About this time, Seconey Mobile Oil Company was assembling the equipment to have 35 oil rig camps doing shallow wells to try and find out the extent of the oil field that they figured was in the Eagle Plain. The area in question was located 150 miles out of Dawson and was bounded on the west by the Ogilvie Mountains and the Richardson Mountains on the east. It extended north for almost two hundred miles. Access to the area was going south of Dawson City to the junction of the Dempster Highway, which ended at the time at Chapman Lake, about 100 miles north. Currently, it goes to Fort McPherson, and barges take the cars across the Peel River. Then, the road goes east to the Arctic Red River, where ferries take vehicles across the mighty Mackenzie River and head north to Inuvik and then north again to Tuktoyuktuck and the Beaufort Sea of the Arctic Ocean.

From the Chapman Lake area, they were to push a road and do a crisscross of seismic lines. They were waiting until freeze-up and going to make a main road by blading off the permafrost on the seismic lines straight north towards Old Crow, with seismic lines going east and west off this main road about every five miles.

Having done quite a bit of flying for Forestry spotting and assessing fires, I had become familiar with a great portion of the area around Dawson City. They wanted to have an aircraft available for resupply and emergency medical evacuation from the area, and I suggested marking the Seela Pass so they didn't have to climb over the 8,000-foot mountain barrier. It was decided that they would paint 4' x 8' by ¾ inch plywood fluorescent orange and screw them together so the snow would not accumulate on either side. They would then put them 500 feet apart up through the pass. They brought in a big helicopter, and it took two of us to erect the signboards. They dropped the two sheets of painted plywood off at about the right distance apart, and we aligned them and screwed them together with short angled blocks the entire length of the pass.



We had a change of Pentecostal ministry in Dawson in the early fall. The new minister discovered that Dawson City had a live house of prostitution operating and suggested it was being ignored by the police. It had been in operation for more than sixty years, dating back to the Klondike Gold Rush days. All her cousins from Montreal dutifully underwent weekly venereal disease checks at the hospital.

The minister penned a letter to the Minister of Justice in Ottawa asking why the RCMP wasallowing this "House of ill Repute" to continue operating in 1964. The woman was subsequently arrested and charged with living off the avails of prostitution. She paid her small fine and retired to Seattle. Within a few months, the incidence of venereal disease flourished in the Native population as they enjoyed the huge monetary input from the rig workers and free access to drinking establishments.

There was a huge salmon run up the Yukon River, and there were a number of fish reels and netting operations. The local Natives would slit them open flat, hang them on sticks, and smoke them over low smokey fires. With the oil rigs and crews beginning to assemble and all the partying taking place at the bars, the fires were not being attended to, and most of the fish rotted. The wind blew from all directions, and every grizzly and black bear headed into Dawson City to get in on the rotten fish they could smell.

In just over two weeks, I killed five black bears and three grizzly bears right in town. I was detailed to finish them off as the Native's 30-30s just aggravated them. I had a .405 Winchester and a .264 Winchester Magnum that dealt with the grizzlies, and the .308 Detachment rifle was adequate for the black bears. The local Natives would shoot the bears and not kill them, and they would bother their dog lines, shoot at their dogs, and release some of their dogs from their lines. I could tell the location of the grizzly when I could see part of a dog coming above the house from a swipe from the wounded grizzly and the continuous barking of the dogs.

The days shortened, the temperature began to plummet, and we insulated the vehicle engines and limited the air intake area of the radiator to provide more inside temperature for the police vehicles. We put a layer of insulation in front of the passenger compartment down the back of the engine. We began to wear more layers of clothing and carry our "Five Star" sleeping bags with us wherever we drove. On the 15th of November, it went down to -50 degrees Fahrenheit.

One of the members presented me with a picture of the coldest temperature ever recorded in the Yukon: minus 80 degrees Fahrenheit at Mayo on the 4th of January 1940. I began to seriously question the sanity of "applying to go North" on that day. Mayo was only about 80 miles away on the Stewart River, which flowed into the Yukon River about 90 miles south, meaning we were lower and possibly colder. The snow crystals formed on everything, and with the still air, they grew to about three inches. Without the sun coming up to melt them, they continued to take all the moisture out of the air. The crystals on the power lines were beautiful white loops between the power poles.

 

The Canadian Pacific Airlines continued to run even in the cold weather. They left one engine running after the other while they were on the ground. I was at the airport to pick up the mail and offered rides to anyone who needed one. I was talking to the pilot and asked him how he found the airport. He said with the still air and the power lines and telephone line on the west side of the road, and the pilot seat on the left side of the aircraft, he just kept following the huge crystals on the lines.

About five minutes later, a very irate semi-truck driver burst into the terminal and went directly over to the pilot, shouting, "If you're going to follow the highway, you'd better learn to drive on the correct side of the road because I saw you coming on my side and had to take the ditch!"

The temperature continued to get colder in Dawson City until it was minus 64 degrees below zero. I encountered colder temperatures but not recorded as the thermometer only went to -70, and the mercury was in the bottom of the globe. The cleared area on the windshield from the defrost began to grow smaller, the heater was not able to keep us warm, and we began seeing our breath in the cab of the truck. My partner, who had been in the North for 25 years, figured it was between 75 and 80 degrees below on the Fahrenheit scale.

The problem with the cold temperatures was that I never saw it above the -50 degree mark until the 17th of March 1965. I got a real charge out of coming to Edmonton and seeing bumper stickers that read, "I SURVIVED THE WINTER OF 65." It had only been down to -40 for less than a week.

I came from a town with 600 people that had four bars with live entertainment and dancing allowed, and beer and any sort of hard liquor drinks sold. I did a mental patient escort out to Edmonton and went to a bar. All you could have was beer, and they served a table full of little beer glasses for $11.00. I had to go to the toilet. On the way back, I saw another person I knew and went to talk to him. They dumped all of my beer and threw me out because I didn't go directly from the bathroom to my own table. The other part of the bar was for ladies and escorts, which I found a bit archaic, as drinking in Newfoundland was really open and a social event with music and dancing.

During the winter, most of our patrols were part of the 300 miles of roads that were maintained to provide assistance to anyone stranded by the cold. We had a lot of miners who worked their claims over the winter. They did this by going underground by digging a shaft down to the "pay dirt," loosening it, hauling it to the shaft, and raising it to the surface with a winless winch system. They stored it so they could either sluice it in a "rocker box" in the comfort of their cabin or in the spring when the water was running, feed it into the sluice box, and collect the gold.

That winter, I found two of them dead as they had run out of wood to keep themselves warm. One had a really small cabin built into the creek bank with a very narrow and short doorway. He had died on his bunk, and his legs and one arm were down over the sides of the narrow bed, and the other arm was hanging straight up against a shelf on the wall. My first job was getting him off the bunk and then trying to thread this two-hundred-pound short man out through the doorway by undressing him down to his long johns. I got him out of the doorway and into the station wagon. His cabin was 39 miles up Bonanza Creek, and our police car radio range was about 10miles at the best of times.

The next thing I heard was a fight betweenthe undertaker and the welfare department because he wanted the amount of money to heat his facilities to thaw him out, get him into a casket, and get him ready for burial in the spring.

I had one trip up Hunker Creek to check on a miner who was still working on his claim. There was little to no snow clearing on the roads and trails that led up the creeks. The creeks froze all the water that usually ran in them, so I had chains on the back tires for traction on the ice, as well as the front tires to assist in steering. Every time there was a frozen riffle and a bit of a climb up the rise to the next level of the creek, you had to get going at a pretty good rate to make it up. We also took along their grocery order that they had arranged at the store for their mid-winter groceries.

I got to the next level and found the cabin with a slight wisp of smoke still coming out of the chimney, which was a good sign. I went to the door and figured he must be really sick because the vehicle was only about 50 feet away from the cabin. I opened the door, and he was still lying on the bunk.

I identified myself, and he sat bolt upright and looked at me. He related that he had just put his last stick of wood in the stove and lay down, prepared to freeze to death. With the extreme cold, he had used up all of the wood he had cut to last out the winter, and it had been too cold to try and cut some more wood. He thought he had already died and gone to heaven because the frost on the windows kept periodically lighting up and then going dark. I guess with the number of times I attempted to make it up the last riffle, the headlights were crossing back and forth across the cabin, giving him that effect.

We packed up everything he had in the cabin. His tools were down his shaft, and he gave me his carbide light and his hand gold scales. I bought his gold scales, which were in a nice glass cabinetry. I took him back to Dawson City with me and to the seniors' lodge.

When I was at Carcross, two of the local Natives who were part of the original discovery of gold on Rabbit Creek, later known as Bonanza Creek, were living there. They used to accompany dancers and singers to the train station to entertain the tourists who came up from Skagway off the cruise ships. The dancers and singers dressed up in their local costumes and performed for the tourists. Skookum Jim and Tagish Charly would tell their stories about the discovery of the gold. Skookum Jim got the name by carrying 150 pounds of bacon in one load up the pass back in 1900. I bought his .256 Newton rifle from him and still have that rifle in my collection.

If I was in town when the tourist train arrived, I was expected to appear in my "Red Serge," but I honestly managed to be busy and not available for a lot of the tourist sessions over the summer. The Yukon Tourist Department paid a lot of the locals to provide a tour of the "Tushi," which was a paddle-wheeler road that was on a dry dock in the settlement. It used to provide a hundred-mile trip down and back to Ben-Mi-Cree, where the tourists stayed overnight until about 1959, when it was dry-docked and Ben-Mi-Cree was closed. The local Native organization wanted the Tourist Department to turn the money over to them, and when they refused, the boat mysteriously caught fire and burned a few years after I left Carcross.

I used to take a small bottle of rum with me for the old collection of miners' coffee. I would listen to the stories they openly related on how they got to the gold rush and where some of them struck it rich. Invariably, they spent it all hiring people to look for the "Mother Lode" (where all that gold came from). I was told that I could not bring them any more things to drink by the matron or I would no longer be welcomed to the lodge.

I informed the three English nurses (whomI had meals with at the hospital), and they wanted to listen to their stories. As they were questioning the old miners who came into the hospital, most of them were not that lucid with old age and whatever malady they suffered that brought them to the hospital. So,for several times each month, four of us would spend a couple of hours listening to them relate how it really was in the Klondike.

Invariably, Pete Brady would have to relate his short trip to heaven when I rescued him from freezing to death in his cabin.

I told the nurses about going over to the seniors' lodge and the fun I had listening to them tell their stories of what really happened all over the Klondike. They would accompany me, and their nurses' duty bags were never once questioned. They all were making notes to send the stories back home to parents and relatives who had gone to the Klondike to seek their fortunes, as well as friends back in England. The 10 and sometimes 15 old-timers joined the coffee session and bragging session, and they kept correcting one another on who and where they had mentioned different people who were no longer there. So it was kept awfully close to the truth on some of the events on the different creeks as to the amount of gold recovered and how the placer mining took place. The majority of them had come over the Chilcoot Pass in 1900, and they all mentioned that the NWMP had saved their lives by making them endure the hauling of all that food and equipment up the mountain.

I now just wish that I had made notes like the nurses had. We had to listen to Pete Brady's story of how I brought him back from heaven to live another few days every time we went to the lodge. In 1932, he and his big brother, Pat, had found a 13-ounce nugget at Mint Creek, two above Discovery on Hunker Creek, and they went off to New York to lead the St. Patrick's Day Parade. I had a few drinks with Pete on the 17th of March when the temperature went above -50 degrees below zero for the first time since November 15th.

Having gone to Banff and received my Mountain Rescue course and had all kinds of safety and mountain climbing equipment, I decided that I had to tackle a mountain that had never been climbed in human history. It was Tombstone Mountain, which is a 2,192-meter elevation (7,192 feet). It is a basalt spire that is all above the tree line and is located in the Ogilvie Mountains about 25 miles west of Chapman Lake at the end of the Dempster Highway and 75 miles northeast of Dawson City.

Getting someone to accompany me on this mountain climbing expedition turned into a bit of a problem. I got one of the bank employees interested, but he got transferred to Whitehorse. The next chap employed with the Department of Highways also got transferred. I approached the son of the local helicopter owner, and the very next day, his father was at the Detachment and told me in no uncertain terms that he had a lot of money invested in his son's helicopter training. He was going to take over the business as he was planning to retire and was not willing to risk him on taking up mountain climbing.

I finally convinced one of the chaps from the Department of Transport to accompany me on the climb. We drove my vehicle to Chapman Lake and packed our camp into the base of Tombstone Mountain. We did the easy climb. When we were at the top, I noticed a pile of rocks holding a short piece of a post with an old telephone box attached to it. I had seen similar boxes in the museum. I opened the front of the box and there was a note that said, "FRANK PHONE HOME."

My would-be mountain climbing partner's father had flown his helicopter to the top of the mountain. He had flown one of their helicopters some seventy-five miles with the telephone and short pole and planted it on the top of the mountain. At least I can say that I was one of the first people who ever climbed that mountain.

The Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation, in the early 1900s, built a ditch that took water from over by the Ogilvie Mountains and into the Klondike area with the idea of using that water to run sluice boxes to recover the gold. They also sold the water to other miners on different creeks in the area. On a couple of the mountain valleys, they had huge redwood pipes with metal bands supporting the pipe, and a company was removing the expensive wood. They had made roads alongside the ditches for the trucks to haul all of the wood and metal bands.

 

I drove my vehicle some 20 miles to hunt for ptarmigan and grouse. I was walking along the roadway, and the next thing I knew, two grizzly bear cubs were on the far bank of the ditch. They both started to yell and then the mother grizzly was headed down the road as fast as she could run towards me. I had the shotgun loaded with three birdshots. I had taken the plug out and it was followed with one buckshot and then one slug for just such a predicament. It was a semi-automatic Browning shotgun.

I fired one shot over her, figuring that would scare her, but it only increased her gait towards me. I let the second and third go right at her head, figuring it would at least blind her, but she did not slow at all. The next buckshot did nothing to slow her gait, and the slug went into her open mouth and came out the back of her head. She took two leaps past me and into a pile of fur.

I took the fish and game back to the scene and captured the two cubs that were still with the mother. They ended up in a zoo when they grew up. That is one of the closest calls that I had with a grizzly with cubs, and I would not like to repeat this situation.

 

Choosing the Right Police Firearm



Having been involved with firearms for most of my life and was allowed to use a .22 single-shot rifle when I was just eight years old. Right at dusk, I was at the very back of our property and I was trying to shoot some partridges that were picking holes in the apples that were on the trees in that area. I was sitting in the crotch of a cedar rail fence, waiting for the partridge to come in and pick holes in the apples in a tree about fifty feet from where I was sitting.I heard the shuffle of leaves behind me, got the rifle at the ready, and pointed at the tree;a big buck deer jumped over the fence,landed in the sight alignment and looked around at me.And I pulled the trigger and shot him in the eye, and he dropped dead.I did not know what to do with a dead dear and got called for supper at about that time.

I guess I was shifting around while sitting at the table, and my father asked me what was wrong. I blurted out that I had just shot a big buck deer by the apple trees. He questioned me when and where, and I told him by the apple trees at the back fence. It happened just about the time I was called to come to supper. He jumped up and said, "Then let's go and get him." That was the first of many I got, and it seemed we always had wild game meat hanging down in someone's well in the neighborhood over the years.

When I was in high school and joined the Army Cadets, I shot in the Eastern Canada competition and won. This qualified me to go to Bisley, England, and shoot the .303 Lee-Enfields on the range up to 1000 yards. I have a badge on my shooting jacket for the "highest Score in the Unit." I had a little Remington pump .22 rifle and got so good I could throw a baby food can in the air and keep it going up by continuing to hit it with each shot.

I took several gunsmithing courses, and in one of them, in order to pass the exam, they gave you a block of metal, a hacksaw, different shaped files, and a drill bit that fit a .22 short caliber. They also gave you pictures of a number of small single-shot pistols. You were to make a pistol, and when you could show that it fired one shell, you passed the course. I put it in the vice and used an elastic band to provide the power for the hammer and fired it remotely a number of times before taking it to the teacher to display my handiwork. I still have it in my collection.

At one time, I was building up a collection of every caliber that Winchester made a rifle for. I got it complete and sold it off to a collector. It is mentioned in another chapter where I built up the .219 Zipper Improved varmint rifle that I put together. I have been reloading for five different calibers since I was 14 years of age. Currently, I have 40 rifles, shotguns, pistols, and revolvers in my collection, and a lot of them are antiques. I have swaged and poured thousands of bullets for reloading by melting down used wheel weights and other lead objects to make my own bullets.

When I was in training, I hadmy name on the McBrine Cup for having the highest score during recruit training. I helped the instructor try to teach the members of our troop how to shoot. Before the Emergency Response Teams, I was on the "Sniper Counter Sniper" team. Every two weeks, you had to shoot a Crow target at 250 yards, and if you did not submit your target, you were kicked off the team. I have four of the Certificates signed by different Commissioners of the Force where, over my 33 years of service, I shot "Possibles" with both rifle and revolver during the Annual Shoot. To describe what a "Possible" is,you have the bullseye on the target, and then inside the bullseye, there is that area called the "C-X" ring. All ten shots have to hit or touch the "C-X" ring with the revolver and the rifle during the competition at the Annual Shoot. So, from all that bragging, you have to realize that I seem to know where I am sending my lead when the gun goes off.

Over the years, in response to my continual insistence on providing a better handgun for the members in the field, my plea was always with officers well up the ranking structure. They always seemed to phone me because they didn't want anything in print. Their greatest fear was equipping members with bigger weapons and more bullets without being able to train everyone to shoot properly and accurately. They realized that most of the members didn't have aninterest in learning to shoot properly or the ability that I had. Giving them more bullets in a handgun with a lot more power brought on the fear of a lot more collateral damage from stray bullets into the general public and civil suits that would result.

When they went to the 9mm over the .38 Special, they almost doubled the muzzle velocity and punched that the bullet had on impact. So, it was a lot more of a usable weapon for all types of enforcement. I was promoting the .357 as the ideal weapon because you could still fire the .38 Special loads for a cheaper practice round and then have the stopping power when you needed it. The .357 bullets had the stopping power, accuracy, and ability to drive a bullet out to 200 yards without having to loop it to the target, which happens with the .38 Special.

As I most often packed my .357 for years with my own homebrew ammunition, I was at a roadblock, and the stolen vehicle was going around our police vehicle. I fired one into the engine compartment when they went past me, and they coasted to a halt about 200 feet away. We were there at their doors to invite them out. The bullet had gone through two thicknesses of metal of the fender and then the inside of the wheel well, then into the block through two thicknesses of the antifreeze chamber, breaking into the cylinder wall before the piston came back up, and the engine destroyed itself in seconds. That was a good example of what the .357 Magnum could do to stop a vehicle.

When I was in Newfoundland, I had a roommate in barracks. They had found the four prisoners whohad escaped from the prison in St. John's. He and his partner had caught them trying to break into a hardware store in a small town outside of St. John's. He had gone back to the police car to radio for more help, and they jumped the other member, kicked him into unconsciousness, and took his revolver. When he came back around the corner, they shot and killed him. The attitude of the chap whodid the shooting when he was in the detachment cells was shouting out that if we gave him a gun, he would shoot six more of us. It was right after that I started carrying my own homebrews, where I drilled a hole down into the nose of the bullet and filled it with mercury and then a thin lead plug taped over the mercury. If I hit and wounded anyone, he was going to die from the mercury poison if the bullet didn't take him out. I know it sounds a bit sadistic, but that was how I felt at the time by losing my best friend and partner.

He and I shared the same room in the barracks for six or seven months, and he was a recruit right out of training. He was the sort of guy whowent to church twice on Sunday, didn't swear, and obviously had a pretty sheltered upbringing as an only child. He came right out of high school and joined the force. I introduced him to the student nurses at the hospital residence, attended the dances there, and did a bit of life in the pubs. We went fishing together and bird hunting, skeet, and trap shooting, and he was always on for the shore party and enjoyed the meals of lobster and scallops when I went scuba diving. What I didn't know when he was killed was that he sort of thought that I was the big brother that he never had when he was growing up.

We worked together to solvesome major break-ins by simply sleeping in the warehouses. We caught them in the act instead of trying to find out who was responsible later on. In a few months, we took quite a few gang members out of the circuit. We were leading most of the Detachment with solved crimes working together. I was coaching hockey at the time, and he was into figure skating. He worked alongside me with our fundraising schemes to raise money for equipment. He was instructing the kids on some of the finer points of stopping, balancingon the blades, and conditioning for skating that I didn't know. I was coaching the kids from the Mount Cashel Orphanage at the time.

What I didn't know at the time was that he had been continually writing letters to his parents, relating all of the new ventures he experienced hanging out with me. The Force sent me to Ottawa to escort his body and give the eulogy at the funeral service for him. I was in full red serge. His mother showed me all of the letters he had written, and she read several of her favorites about some of the fun we had together.

His parents came to visit me twice when I was in Newfoundland. They drove down in their camper, and I learned that he was a retired Baptist Minister. When I went to the Yukon, they came to visit me in Dawson City. I guess they sort of took me as their lost son.

On their way home from the Yukon trip, they had an accident and were hit by an impaired driver in Toronto who was going the wrong way on the Don Valley Parkway. They were both killed. One of the Toronto Metro Police officers phoned me after locating a stack of letters in the camper with my name and address in the Yukon, wondering if I knew any of the next of kin. I could only tell him that he was a retired Baptist Minister and was able to give him the address of the church. They had a lot of family attend the funeral of their son in 1964.

I have wandered around all across Canada for more than 33 years with a loaded .38 Special or a loaded .357 Magnum at times, and I have never fired or injured anybody or fired a shot in anger directly at anyone. You can talk up a pretty disastrous story, knowing full well that the best you could do was to deafen them a little and cause some aggravation at the wound entry point. I did not bother talking up the center-of-mass shooting description. I would cover between the eyes, shooting, and that was usually enough to convince them that I was serious. When they were left with the preference forthe left or right eye, I usually had them convinced that I was in control of the situation. I would offer that it had six bullets, and I was going to use them all up if I started with one.

I was involved in a bank robbery vehicle chase and also with a stolen vehicle. I shot out both back tires from the passenger seat position, but they kept going, obviously a little slower on the slowly deflating rear tires. I thought that if I shot out the rear window, they would consider that we were getting serious as they were heading back to town. Three shots later, the tempered glass window did not shatter. I examined the three lead streak marks on the glass and took some photographs that I intended to use against the Force to get a replacement .38 Special firearm. They went off the road as a result of the one totally flat tire, and when they went off the road, they hit a big tree. The ambulances took them all away as nobody had their seatbelts on as they were getting ready to jump out and run. There was a major inquiry over that one, and a lot of statements were taken by several levels of management. I forgot to mention or point out the lead marks on the back window.

The .38 Special was good for punching paper up to about 20 yards. After that, you take more of the front sight and "loop" your bullet at the target. I always felt that you could cause more of an injury to the opponent if you threw it at him. After that incident, my preference became my .357 Magnum "Highway Patrolman" with my own home loads that have some serious stopping power. At least it made a heck of a lot more noise.

I have a .357 Magnum with a 10 ½ inch barrel that I have won several competitions with, doing silhouette shooting at 50 – 100 and 200-yard targets. You cannot run up to the nearer target until you hear the clang of the bullet hitting the target, and you only have six rounds to do that round with. The target is shaped out of ¼ inch steel to the actual size of a turkey, a smaller pig, and a smaller deer.

The snub-nosed .38 with the 2-inch barrel that wasissued to the members in plain clothes duties were totally useless, much beyond ten yards for accuracy. Again, I felt you could cause more damage if you threw it at the suspect. They made a hell of a flash and a lot of noise because a lot of the gunpowder was still burning when the bullet had already left the short barrel.

Over the years, I submitted report after report trying to get the Force to go into a semi-automatic pistol because you could have ten and fifteen-round clips with the different manufacturers mainly because most of the members are not proficient with a handgun and also, the Force limited the number of shells available for practice. In response to that memorandum, they issued more bullets in speed loaders, and all that did was add more weight to our duty belts.

At one time, you had to account for every shell that was issued to you. It was not uncommon for some of the senior NCO members to come to the Annual Shoot with green brass shells that had been in their revolvers for years without being fired or cleaned. They were not interested in becoming proficient with their revolvers and had avoided Annual Shoots, so their revolvers spent most of their lifetime locked in a filing cabinet in their office.

I was interested in remaining proficient with shooting accuracy, so I reloaded my own ammunition and gathered up the old brass from the shoots. I also collected used wheel weights from local tire stores, melted them down, and cast my own bullets. This way, I was ready for gopher patrol and could practice shooting my revolver regularly, all while keeping my ammunition costs reasonable.

In one of my submissions to the Force, I proposed acquiring a more effective handgun for a service weapon. I took seven two-gallon tins, filled them completely with water, and screwed the lids on tightly. The firearms were discharged from about ten yards back, directly parallel to the cans. After firing different police weapons into the center of each tin container, I submitted pictures with one of my reports, including the feet-per-second muzzle velocity for each cartridge.

The .38 Special created a hole the size of abullet, with water coming out of the hole only on one side of the front of the tin. The water stopped the bullet within the width of the tin in about four inches, with slight bulging on the other side. The muzzle velocity was 675 ft/second.

The 9 mm created a hole through both sides, with a small hole in the front and a slightly larger hole at the back. The muzzle velocity was 1,100 ft/second.

The .40 mm had a larger hole in the front and about a two-inch hole in the back, with the tin turned back around the exit hole. The muzzle velocity was 1,551 ft/second.

The .357 Magnum caliber had a one-inch hole in the front and about an eight-inch hole in the back, with the metal turned back around the exit hole. The muzzle velocity was 1,500 ft/second.

The .45 caliber had the same size hole in the front as the bullet, and the can was split on the side where the seam was, with no exit hole. The muzzle velocity was 859 ft/second.

The .44 Magnum had about a one-inch hole in the front, and the rest of the can was completely turned inside out, with a cloud of mist 20 feet around the tin. Surprisingly, it was still sitting in the same place, with the top and the back of the tin curled around the front. This was with hollow-point ammunition. The muzzle velocity was 1,550 ft/second.

I then put a plug in the .38 Special tin, filled it back up with water, and shot it with a .308 police rifle, hitting the wooden plug where the bullet entered. Nothing was left of the front of the tin; it was completely torn apart in every direction. The front of the tin was shredded and wrapped around the sides, as well as the top and bottom, and it jumped about three feet in the air when hit. The same spray of misty water accompanied the blast (3,358 ft/second), with the 180-grain bullet delivering 2,913 foot-pounds of energy.

I then fired a 12-gauge shotgun with “Double-00” buckshot at the tin, which was propelled about 20 feet away. Examination of the tin revealed that it had nine holes the size of the buckshot on both the front and back. The total shocking power it represented, as evidenced by the tin being carried 20 feet away, was significant (1,850 ft/second), producing 1,575 foot-pounds of energy, which is three times that of the .357 Magnum revolver and twice the energy of the .44 Magnum revolver.

I had included a picture with three lead streaks on the rear window of the stolen vehicle, but no one took much notice of how that picture was taken or questioned when the photograph was captured in response to that report. I received a memo stating that, due to financial restrictions within the Force, no consideration would be given to re-arm the members, along with a thank you for my time and effort. From the time of the first memos in 1965 or 1966 until they finally started issuing the 9 mm semi-automatic Smith & Wesson Model 5946 with 10-round clips, retiring the .38 Specials six-shot revolvers took nearly twenty-nine years.

Looking at further revolvers issued by the Force, initially, only the officers carried swords, and their revolvers were the Webley .442 caliber, which wastop-break and self-extracting of spent cartridges. They were “double action,” meaning that pulling the trigger rotated the cylinder, bringing up the next active round while cocking the hammer. Further pressure on the trigger released the hammer onto the centerfire portion of the primer.

In contrast, the “single action” action of its predecessor required you to manually pull back the hammer to cock it; then, pressure on the trigger released the hammer to strike the primer of the cartridge.

Some rifles were issued to different posts; initially, they were the Sniper-Enfield Mark II, which was a single-shot breach-loading .577 caliber rifle. Around 1888, a number of Winchester Model 1876 rifles in various calibers, including .45-60, .45-70, and .45-90, were purchased. These were repeating shot rifles that held six cartridges, complete with a saddle ring. This caused a dangerous situation with similar cartridges that could jam in one of the other caliber rifles, preventing the action from closing fully. Professional tools were required to remove the jammed cartridge.

They continued to purchase the Winchester Model 1876, but matching the bullet caliber with the rifle continued to plague the far-flung posts, as the caliber was displayed very lightly on the bottom flat portion of the cartridge. The caliber was also displayed faintly on a brass plate on the bottom of the receiver, which could be misidentified as one of many calibers such as .44, .44-40, .45-70, .44 WCF, .38, or .32 caliber.

 

Refurbishing the RCMP Graveyard at Dawson City, Y.T.



Arriving in Dawson City, I was there for about half an hour after I arrived and was sent out to investigate a hit and run where a boy riding a bicycle had been struck by a vehicle and was injured.I located the vehicle and arrested the impaired driver.He got a month's sentence, and the stupid judge said he was to serve his time in the RCMP cells in Dawson City.That meant we had a night guard, and the day shift had to guard the prisoner.The other married member would have him digging his garden and cutting the lawn when he was working days.

I had him working with me when we refurbished the RCMP cemetery.I made all new headboards.We had a big supply of 2 x 10s in the warehouse, so I glued them together, rounded the top, routered in the detail of the member and regimental number and date of death, and painted the headboards white with black lettering.I replaced the broken wooden picket fence with a short chain-link fence around the entire graveyard.

We then hauled white-colored gravel in the back of the Detachment station wagon from up the creeks for the walkways areas and black gravel for over the individual graves.I made a big new sign complete with the RCMP crest for over the entrance to the cemetery and painted it up as best I could.I introduced a new thing in an Indian's life that he had never experienced in his 40 years of life, and that was-- -- -- work.

I found an abandoned single-cylinder engine that was in the dump. It had three-foot wheels on each side, and they were almost four inches thick.I tried turning it over, and it was not seized, and I welded a big splitting axe head onto the outside of one of the wheels. And a similar block of iron on the other wheel on the opposite side of the frame work of the other wheel to balance it off.I bought a new magneto from the hardware store, put some kerosene in the fuel tank, cleaned the spark plug, and it started on the third rotation of the big wheels.It had about ten revolutions per minute at its slowest speed.I welded up a really heavy metal framework that the splitting axe went through that sloped away from where the axe went through.I built a set of skids and a base so that I could pull it around town from wood pile to wood pile with the Police station wagon.All you had to do was put the end of the block against the wheel after the axe went past, and then you stood well back because there was no way you could control where the two pieces of wood where going to fly.I have no idea how many cords of wood we will cut for everyone in town in the next couple of weeks.I understand that it remained in service for five or six years after I left until someone from the Workman’s Compensation came there on holiday, and it was immediately retired to the Museum.

It was hot work because in the summer in Dawson City, it gets into the low 90s on the Fahrenheit scale, and the sun does not go down for over two months. I put a lot more effort into it than I needed to and kept bugging him to keep up with me as we had to shovel the gravel into the back of the station wagon onto a big tarp and then shovel it off into the wheel barrel and then move it to where we needed it within the cemetery.We then got to paint all the buildings on the compound and all of the wooden sidewalks around the compound that we built.We painted the outside of the Detachment boat, and then we varnished the inside of the 26-foot canoe.We then painted a lot of the wooden sidewalks on the main street in town.

Then, we split wood for all of the seniors with our mechanized wood splitter that I built.We went out and cut a lot of trees, and I had one of the local truckers haul it in when we loaded it for him, and he dumped it around the settlement, and we cut and split that as well for Native residents living in Dawson.He ended up with his own wood business after the six-month sentence was served.I befriended him and was on several trips where he was hired on as the cook for a local prospector (our night guard as well).

I have competed in all sorts of shooting competitions and represented the force when we did the competition shooting with the Alaska State Police.Four of us would be chosen every other year to travel to Alaska to compete. Bill McQuirter, Bill Henderson, Mike Dwernichuk, and I were on one trip to Anchorage.It was not fair competition because we had to compete with their "drinking team" as well.They were composed of their "vice squad," and when we arrived at about six of their drinking establishments, their show of the evening went on, and drinks were served on the house.This went on until well after midnight.We had to be on the range at 9:00 a.m., and we still beat their shooting team.When they came to Whitehorse the next year, we still beat their scores as well, as it continued the next year in Fairbanks.

I have six certificates signed by different Commissioners for shooting "possibles" (ten rounds cutting the 'CX' in the middle of the bulls-eye) with rifle and revolver in my 33 + years of annual shoots, so I sort of know where to place the bullets.I was on the "Sniper - Counter sniper" team, and you had to submit a "Crow" target shot at 200 yards every second week, or you were off the team.That was before ERT teams (Emergency Response Teams)were formed.

I won the Eastern Provincial trap and skeet competition in Halifax, and the price was a fully carved German Shotgun for trap and a Beretta"Pirelli" for the skeet prize (which I still have), and it has never been fired.After I won that competition, I was interviewed on TV and questioned how I hadwon the competition with a fully choked semi-automatic shotgun.I gave credit to "Browning" forproducing the best weapons and said that I had three other "Brownings" to boast about as well.

About three weeks later, in the mail, I received a gold replica of the Browning shotgun as a tie tack.



I have a 10" barrelled .357 S&W revolver for doing silhouette shooting, and you have a pig and turkey-sized metal targets out to 200 yards for that.I had the idea that I was going to understudy Cpl. Brown, our armorer in Depot, as I had taken a few gun-smithing courses and built my own revolver from a block of steel, they provided that shoots .22 shorts, and I have built up several rifles over the years, one I still have.It is a bull-barrelled 219 Zipper Improved. I have 40 shotguns, rifles, revolvers, and pistols in my collection; a lot of them are collectibles.I, at one time, had a complete Winchester rifle collection of every make, model and caliber that Winchester ever made, and I sold it off quite a few years back.I still do some archery, and I gave up serious hunting for a big game about fifteen years ago because there is a lot of chewing on a moose for two people, and it seems our freezers are always full, and there is no room for wild game.I would not have to go very far to bag one because they are regular visitors to our yard and the subdivision.

I do most of my hunting with a camera now.I have a Nikon COOLPIX P1000 camera that has a CMOS collection system, and the lens goes from 24 - 3,000mm hand, so you can get up close and personal with most everything.I have a Sky-Watcher "Star Adventurer" attachment that you put on your tripod. Dial up your latitude,focus it on "Polaris,"the North Star, and attach your camera to it. When you turn on the electric motor that is inside the unit, it looks after the counter-rotation of the earth, and all of the sky and the Universe are still.The people at the equator are spinning along at 1000 miles an hour where we are at this latitude of 52063 degrees north and just doing about 500 mph.I do quite a bit of cosmic photography with it, as well as bird watching.It is the best point and shoot camera that was ever invented.

 Take a look at the website on the Internet, "Sky-watcher Photo Gallery," and you will see what you can produce.They have a really slow server and hundreds of pictures, and you have a choice of planets or solar systems, so set up the download and go for coffee.I have forwarded several of my pictures but none of them have made the gallery yet as they are opening a separate section for cameras as it is a new popular medium.Most of them are using a telescope with a camera or computer attached, and I am in the category of just a camera because of the big magnification of the lens.

At about 1,000 mm, you get a full-frame picture of the moon, and at 2,000mm, you get about a quarter of the moon, and then at 3,000mm, you are looking inside a crater and see the shadow of a mountain on the side of the crater.You can go onto digital settings, and it multiplies it in sets of two and three times so you can go to 6,000 mm. and then 9,000 mm. At 6,000 mm, you only get about three craters on the moon in a full-frame image.I showed the local chaps at the observatory of the volcanic action on the moon, and he told me that the moon did not have any volcanoes and it was inert until I showed him my photograph with the shadow of the volcano on the side of one of the craters as well as lava flows in one other area.He asked if he could have a copy of the pictures. I turned the camera over to him, and he copied it onto his computer.

When I got home, I discovered he had deleted all of the pictures that I had on my camera.The very next day, he was being interviewed on the CBC, and he gave credit for the pictures to a local amateur photographer, and he took credit for discovering volcanic action on the moon.I can duplicate the pictures, but I have to have the right phase of the moon the catch the shadow of the volcano and, of course, a clear night, but that has not happened in the past four to five months.

We live on a three-acre, mostly treed property in a subdivision about 4 miles southeast of Sherwood Park and six miles east of Edmonton in a house that I built all by myself, with my wife hauling the materials in our Volvo station wagon and trailer.I did everything except shingle the roof, and that was the only contractor that I had on the property.With being forever mobile with the Force, I built it big to be in the marketplace if it was to be saleable, and with the three floors and the four-car garage, we have 4,400 square feet under the roof.My wife and I rattle around by ourselves and a miniature long-haired Dachshund in a four-bedroom, four-bathroom facility with two fireplaces.That all got started 47 years ago. 

With being on an acreage, there is no end to the ideas that you can get involved in. I have a wood working shop in the basement with a dust collection system with every tool possible.I have a full metal working and welding shop in the garage with MIG, TIG, Arc, Oxy/Acetylene, and now Plasma.I have cut-off saws and a metal lathe with all the attachments, and if I cannot fix it, repair it, or build it better, it is time for a trip for you to the dump. With the kids gone off to follow their careers, our garage has turned into a two-car crowded garage and my complete metal working shop and small engine repair shop.I have built 19 trailers and modified 26 other hard-topped camper trailers to make utility trailers as well. I have built 13 hydraulic wood splitters, and I have lost track of all the other things that I have built since I retired 30 years ago.

I used to do tree trimming and falling, and I gave that up mostly about five years ago.I build fences and decks and steps and have built garages and wood sheds.I do a lot of bird watching and we have 25 feeders around the property and have a great variety of birds come to the feeders as I feed year around.We have eight peanut butter feeders right in front of our kitchen window hanging down from the facia, each with 24 holes, and it is a constant flight of birds that you can sit at the window, and they are just about a foot and a half away getting snacks.I don't go to the bar or smoke, but I spend my mad money on bird and squirrel seeds.

 Jantje has 30flower gardens around the property, and she entertains herself with that most of the summer.I rotor till a plot, and she runs at with another variety of flowers or roses or ornamental trees.This past year, we have gone into raised beds, and I have built a few of them in the area as well, and we are getting too old to bend over.We have some trouble with the moose and deer as they are a real problem in the area because there is a whole section (one square mile) of mostly treed property directly across the road from us. 

For my 70th birthday present, my wife bought me a Polaris "Ranger 400" side-by-side ATV with a heated cab.I have built it up to do my snow clearing.I did it with Cub Cadet garden tractors with chains and blades before that.I did it with a snow blower for about ten years and I got sick of a couple hours of walking in a blizzard with half my wardrobe on.The Polaris is a side-by-side heated cab, and I have installed a winch and a 78" blade that I have stabilized between the frame at the front and pushing from the rear hitch with a 2" square tubing running to the back.It takes me about five minutes to clear my driveway and turn around.So to further entertain myself, I do a mile of the subdivision road and 42 driveways and turn-arounds.I can be back in the house in about four hours if I hurry in the comfort of the heated cab and if I don't get invited in for coffee or a drink.With the blade angled and about 25 mph, I can send the snow off the roadway almost over to the fence.The Polaris was into its 10th season with very little maintenance, and I got about eight hours out of five gallons of fuel and a lot of Bailies for my coffee and a lot of other treats and credit cards for fuel.A few of the driveways are half a mile long, and some of the turnarounds are for the water trucks and a huge area.

This summer, I had Polaris upgraded to a "Brutus"model with a three-cylinder diesel with hydrostatic drive and all hydraulic lift front end and hydraulically drive P.T.O. (power take-off) that they have 19 different attachments that you can put on this machine.The story about the new machine is rather amusing.My neighbor, who has a landscaping business, came over to show off his new Polaris "Brutus" ATV that he had bought second-hand for his business.He had the blade attachment and moved left and right and up and down and was able to slope it for grading.He also had a 65-inch mower deck and brush sweeper that worked off the P.T.O.Polaris had been approached by "Bob Cat" engineers in 2013, and they wanted to engineer a four-wheel drive machine that did not tear up the turf as their units did that would accommodate their present line of attachments, which resulted in the "Brutus" hydraulics and front and rear suspension being designed by Bobcat.

I was totally impressed with how well it was made, how solid the hydraulics were on the front end, the heavy metal used for the lift mechanism, and the quick attachment for changing attachments. I was explaining all the added features of the insulated cab, defrost system, power steering, tilt steering wheel, air conditioning, powered lift on the dump box on the back, wipers, windshield washer, high and low headlights, and LED tail lights and brake lights and the "joy stick" that controlled the blade to my wife.I had just finished servicing my Polaris "Ranger 400" and sort of put it away in our cold storage shed for the summer. My neighbor came over to see if I wanted to go with him to the Polaris dealer in Wetaskiwin, as they had a forklift attachment listed for sale on Kajjii that he was going to purchase.

Unbeknown to me my wife had approached him and told him to keep an eye out for another one of the Brutus models so she could buy it for my 80th birthday present.I was tied up with another project, and when he came back with the set of forklifts, he gave my wife a quote for a brand new 2016 Polaris Brutus with blade and snow blower that they had in stock.She phoned and told them to put it on hold, and she went to the bank and got a certified check and came back and gave it to me and told me to go and pick up my 80th birthday present, which I willingly headed out.

When the Brutus was complete, they sent one with a load of attachments to every one of their Canadian dealerships.They found that there were no Terrain Vehicle drivers with deep enough pockets to afford one and could see no need for any of the attachments, so they were not really saleable items. So, by 2016, they were no longer available in Canada, and they only sold them to the larger cities and the American army.My Brutus has only been used to clear the snow on the dealership's parking lot and driveway with the blade for the past four winters and had 53 hours on it.They would only sell it with the blade, machine and snow blower, so we got a major brake on the total cost of the machine and attachments.

I had better give up this rattle of thoughts, or you will figure that I am the biggest braggart you ever met or heard of.I have lots more things that I have done in my life, so I have lots to write about.I have over 300 hours recorded below 60 feet with SKUBA and have been poking a hole in the air, suspended on wings for over 60 years since I got my license. I have just under 7,000 hours recorded and checked out on 19 different aircraft, the biggest twin was a DC-3 and I have 50 hours of training to fly a helicopter.I owned my own aircraft for 9 1/2 years and flew it all over the North.The longest cross-country trip I have done is from Fort McPherson, NWT, to my home town of Coldwater, Ontario.Before I got back to Fort McPherson I had just over 10,000 miles under the wings.With all of my life experiences and the 33+ years with the RCMP I have a few chapters in my book to be filled in.

 

Digging Graves In The RCMP Cemetery



I recall at the end of the lowering of the flag ceremony myself and another member were marching over to the Sgt. Major’s office to turn in the flag for it to be put up in the morning.As we marched along the parade square, there was a good-looking young lady on the sidewalk, and my partner looked over at me and was smiling. I smiled as well, and when we were about to go up the steps to the Headquarters Building, I noticed the Sgt. Major, looking out of the window of his office.I rapped on the door and waswelcomed in.He said that he saw us ogling that young lady, and I hada problem that an ex-member had died, and the burial ceremony was on Monday.I am going to give you extra duties for ogling that young lady and here are the dimensions and where you are to dig the grave.You will find the picks and shovels in that little building east of the gate to the graveyard.That was Friday night, and we got extra duties for smiling at a good-looking girl.

We went over to the graveyard and located and measured it out and marked in the grave site with our picks and shovels and went back to barracks to take off and clean our red serge and put our Stetson in the hat press polish our sand brown and boots and polish our brass buttons, then went to bed.We got up and went to the stables at 6:00 a.m. and cleaned the barn, fed and groomed the horses, swept all of the floors, and then went back to barracks and changed into our long blues and marched to the mess to have our breakfast and then marched back to the barracks to change into our fatigues, then off to graveyard and began digging.We stopped and went for dinner by ourselves as the rest of the troop had the day off, and we were over half done with the eight-foot hole.

When we came back, there was a class of membersfrom the Regina City Police whowere getting instruction on the use and firing of the tear gas guns.They were over the fence from the graveyard and firing in the other direction.My troop mate kept mentioning that he was pretty nervous about being in a graveyard, especially when he saw all of the sunken areas where he said the casket had fallen in and the ground had sunk down.He blamed me for smiling when I looked at that girl, and I said that I smiled when I looked over at him, and he was showing a lot of ivory.I had taken my turn at picking the hard soil and had cleaned most of the loose dirt out of the hole.And climbed outfor a breather and said it was his turn.He got down and did some picking, and I passed him a shovelat the side of the hole. 

Iwas watching them stand up an old door frame, and the first fellowwas handed the tear gas gun, and I watched him shoot at the door.I could see it hit the top of the frame, andit then went high in the air, and I lost sight of it because of the leaves on the trees above us.

They were practicing with what is called “Flight-rite” shells.They are about an inch and a half in diameter and about 15 inches long, and as they pass out of the barrel of the tear gas gun, there are four sets of fins that are spring loaded, come out and keep the projectile travelling in a straight direction.They are for shooting through windows when the culprit is inside a building from a fair distance back.They are fairly accurate for about 150 yards.The other shorter shells are for firing into a crowd of people, and it just spread the tear gas out about fifty feet, and it would be a fifty-foot wide dispersal of tear gas.We had already taken our tear gas training, and I was interested, looking to see how much the memberwas kicked back from the recoil of the gun.There wasa lot of powder in the cartridge to send that loaded shell for quite a distance.When it wasfired, it lit up the fuse at the back, emitting tear gas and makingthe projectile really hot so it could not be picked up and thrown back at the Police.When it hit the top of the door,It obviously damaged the fins on the back ofone side of the projectile, and itwent away up into the sky, dispersing the gas, and it obviously turned over and came back down in our direction.

The next thingI knew, it came down through the trees and landed in one of the sunken grave sites about ten feet away from my partner with a big “Thunk sound.”He said, “WHAT TO HELL WAS THAT?Hestood up and looked around.There was the tear gas wafting up very gently with white smoke and making this hizzing sound. He immediately jumped up out of the hole, and as he ran past me, he said, “I told you I did not like going into graveyards!”I called to him to come back and he just speeded up his pace and headed for the barracks.I ran after him, and he was lying on his bunk with his pillow over his head.It took a lot of persuading to get him to go back with me.

He said he was about five years old and went with his mum and dad to his uncle’s funeral.And they were lifting up the casket with ropes andcarrying it over to above the grave, then were going to let it down into the grave.He had goneto help them and fell into the hole, and the casket slipped and fell into the hole at an angle, and he was trapped in the hole with the casket angled over himuntil they got ropes around the end of the casket and pulled it back and then got him out of the hole by someone jumping down and lifting him out.It really gave his uncle a memorable send-off.

I kept assuring him that it was just a tear gas shell that landed in that grave.I finally persuaded him to come back with me.By the time we got back to the graveyard, the shell had finished dispersing the tear gas, and the cartridge was still stuck in the middle of the sunken grave.We hollered over to the instructor and I threw the empty shell as far as I could over the fence.We were fortunate that there was a gentlebreeze blowing away from our work site, and the smell of the tear gas did not affect us in finishing the grave-digging exercise.In the eleven months that we were in training, there had to be half a dozen graves dug and filled in with extra duties that werehanded out.We happened to be the third group and only two that had been sentenced to extra duties. The others involved five or six members of our troop digging or filling in the holes.

Dangerous Grizzly Bear Encounter



The Forestry and Game Warden received a call mid-winter from the manager of the Socony-Mobil Oil drilling camp, reporting trouble with a grizzly bear in the Eagle Plains area. The bear had been moving from one camp to another, eating out of their garbage dumps, and had threatened several workers. They were concerned the bear might kill someone if not dealt with. The manager suspected the bear was old and possibly sick since it should have been hibernating months earlier.

Eagle Plains is located about 300 miles northeast of Dawson City and is accessible by driving up the Dempster Highway. From there, the oil company roads stretched north, crossing the Eagle River and following seismic lines, which had been graded almost straight north from the Chapman Lake turnoff, which was the end of the Dempster Highway at that time. The relatively flat area of the Eagle Plains is bordered by the Ogilvie Mountain range to the west and the Richardson Mountains to the east, paralleling the Mackenzie River. The roads were perfectly straight and regularly cleared of several feet of snow to allow camps and drilling rigs to be moved from one location to another. The company had 35 oil rigs drilling shallow wells to assess the extent of the oil and gas deposits throughout Eagle Plains.

We loaded up the four-wheel-drive pickup truck with plenty of fuel, food, our “Arctic Five Star” sleeping bags, and layers of clothing. It was -65°F when we left Dawson City. Upon reaching the first camp, we learned the road had been closed to truck traffic due to concerns that the drill stems might break in such low temperatures. They gave us a map and the locations of their drill rig sites close to the main road so they could monitor our progress. Every camp had radio contact, which provided some assurance. The main road was straight for miles, smoothly graded over the permafrost, with high snowbanks on either side. When we descended into the Eagle River valley, the windshield began frosting up as the temperature dropped even further. Crossing the ice bridge, the cold intensified. Once we climbed out of the valley, the frost on the windshield cleared slightly. My partner remarked that he had insulated the truck engine to ensure some warmth in the cab despite the extreme cold.

We finally arrived at the camp where the grizzly had been harassing the workers and were invited in for supper. Earlier that day, the cook had taken two buckets of garbage out, and as he stepped onto the four-by-eight-foot deck, the door closed behind him. Standing directly off the step was the grizzly bear. The cook, dressed only in his whites and a hat, found himself face-to-face with the six-foot-tall bear. He said the bear’s breath smelled awful. As the bear growled and snarled, the cook slowly lowered the buckets of scraps and inched back inside, frostbitten on his forearms and ears from the brief exposure to the cold.

Another worker told us how he had been filling the water tanks behind the stove. As he went to hang the hose to drain for the next fill-up, it became stuck. When he went to free it, he saw that the grizzly had the other end of the forty-foot hose in its teeth. The man immediately dropped the hose, ran to the rig, and climbed the ladder, freezing his hands on the rungs as he watched the bear return to the garbage dump. The entire scene was illuminated by the rig’s lights.

My partner admitted that he had brought me along to deal with the bear, as I had a lot of experience with bears. He wasn’t going to hold the flashlight for me either—he was more than happy to let me take the lead.

During the summer, when oil company employees had gathered in Dawson City for winter operations, six liquor outlets, including the liquor store and four bars with live entertainment, contributed to a lot of drinking. The local Natives were catching salmon and curing them, but the chaos from the drinking led to many salmon fires being neglected. The fish rotted, and the smell attracted every grizzly and black bear to town. Over a two-week period, I shot four black bears and five grizzlies. The locals, armed with .30-30 rifles, would aggravate the bears, and I would be called in to finish the job. On one occasion, a man sent his dog team after a grizzly, only for the bear to dismember the dogs. It wasn’t hard to find the bear afterward; the scene was horrific.

That night at camp, I brought my rifle into the cook shack to warm up. I convinced one of the workers to come outside and shine a light over the garbage pit, about 100 feet from the kitchen steps. A trench, ten feet deep, had been dug in the permafrost for waste, and a berm of dirt had been piled at one end. The grizzly, unhappy with our presence, growled from the bottom of the trench. I waited for a clean shot as the bear paced, but just as it stood up, roaring, the light went out. The worker holding it had rushed back inside, trying to scrape ice from the window so he could shine the light from there. When that failed, I taped the flashlight to my rifle and went back out cautiously.

I called out, and the bear responded with growls from the garbage pit. When it finally climbed the berm, moving its head from side to side, I aimed and fired. The muzzle flash was bright, and when the smoke cleared, the bear was gone. I reloaded and cautiously approached. The bear roared and charged up the slope, but I fired again, hitting it mid-air. The bear crashed to the ground about 30 feet away and fled into the scrub spruce trees. I was confident I had hit it with a fatal shot, so I decided to let it stiffen up and die while we ate supper.

Throughout the meal, the workers regaled me with their tales of hunting squirrels and raccoons. Afterward, I asked for volunteers to help me check on the bear. Unsurprisingly, no one volunteered. So, I taped a flashlight to a hockey stick, thinking the bear would go for the light and not the person. I followed the bear's tracks along a seismic line, and about 300 yards in, they slowed to a walk. I found the bear lying dead in the snow. It had died back at the garbage pit and would have saved me the trouble of listening to all those hunting stories if it had known.

We retrieved a Nodwell-tracked vehicle with gin poles to hoist the 12-foot bear and took pictures. We loaded the bear into the Forestry pickup and headed home, checking in with the rig camps along the way. Some sections of the road ran straight for 50 or 60 miles, and we decided to stop at one camp before crossing the Eagle River, as we expected the valley would be bitterly cold.

As we approached the turnoff near the Eagle River, the steering wheel wouldn’t turn, and the truck veered into a snowbank, stalling. The battery was dead, and attempts to start it were futile. We resigned ourselves to waiting in the back with our sleeping bags, but the bear’s frozen body transferred the cold directly into the truck bed. We used the shovel to carve out tunnels in the snowbank, creating small caves where we could shelter.

On the third day, after I had run out of food, the situation became more anxious. Our tunnels were icing up, and the snow insulation was losing its effectiveness. My partner mentioned he heard something. I strained to listen and heard a faint clicking sound. I dug through the snow and peered out to see a herd of caribou blocking the road. I grabbed my rifle, lined up a shot, and fired—but had forgotten to chamber a round. Quietly, I reloaded, aimed again, and pulled the trigger. The deafening blast from inside the tunnel kicked back hard, but there was no caribou lying in the road. Instead, I saw a small puff of steam about 50 feet away. The extreme cold had shrunk the barrel, causing the bullet to fall short. I kept that bullet as a souvenir of the incident.

About five hours later, a truck arrived and pulled us out. They mentioned they had been waiting for the temperature to rise to -60°F, per company policy. We were fed at the next camp before heading back to Dawson City. Upon skinning the bear, I found that my first shot had pierced between the ribs, gone through both chambers of the heart, and lodged against a rib on the other side. The second shot had hit the left hind leg and stopped in the chest cavity. The Socony-Mobil manager had the bear made into a full-head mount rug.

My partner later reflected that the temperature in the Eagle River valley had likely been between -70°F and -75°F, as the mercury in the rearview mirror thermometer had sunk entirely into the bulb. I visited the Socony-Mobil office and saw hundreds of oil samples. They said it took about a week to drill a well, and they had 35 rigs drilling for two months. The deepest well, known as "Molar," produced sweet crude, with oil samples ranging from dark brown to reddish amber. The manager believed it was one of the most extensive oil-bearing fields ever discovered. However, Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau's Berger Inquiry stopped the Mackenzie River pipeline due to environmental concerns and Indigenous land claims. Despite proposals from both Canada and the U.S. for pipelines connecting the Beaufort Sea and Prudhoe Bay to the southern markets, none were ever approved, even after 56 years.

Attempted bank robbery at Dawson City

An early morning call from the Bank of Commerce reported that the front door of the bank was open, and there was blood on the entrance and stairs leading to the second floor.I responded and the entrance to the attic was open, and the blood trail continued to the rear of the bank and to where a boat had been driven into the shore.There was a rugged wooden ladder made from Lodge Pole Pine that was still leaning against the back of the bank building leading to the roof.I climbed the ladder, and a hole had been chopped through the roof that led to the attic, and it was piled with cancelled cheques and bank records several feet thick in areas.I found a small packsack with six sticks of dynamite and the timed fuse but no blasting caps.I located a bundle of cancelled cheques fromRobert Service near the open access to the second floor with a drop of possibly ten feet, where there was a railing running across the open stairway.It was obvious that the culprits had dropped from the opening, encountered the railing, and been seriously injured.

It was decided that it was more than likely some persons from Alaska had been involved and possibly may be still heading down river and I should fly the river to see if they had not made it back to Alaska.I flew the river north and encountered only one boat that was about ten miles short of the border going northwest at that time.I made a low pass, and as I went over the boat, a person under the canvas poked his head out.So, I assumed they were the persons responsible, and I could see that they both had heavy beards.I did not have time to file a flight plan to enter Alaska, and I tried contacting the airport at Circle, as that was the only airport that was alongside the Yukon River, and I could not get a response on the radio.I radioed Fairbanks, and they tried phoning their Customs agent in Circle, but they got no response.

When I got to Circle and located that airport, there was a herd of horses scattered all over the airport.I made a number of low passes and finally scared them off the runway and landed.I was greeted by a member of the Alaska State Police and a very agitated person claiming he was the Customs Agent, though he had no uniform on.I explained what had happened and that the two persons responsible were in a boat and more than likely be arriving on the river within the hour.The Customs Agent kept rattling on about seizing the aircraft, and the Alaska State Policeman, with a big wink, said he was placing me under arrest and would be taking me into custody.We went for a coffee at the local grocery store, and he phoned the chap with the ambulance when I described the path of blood to the boat, so he would need some serious medical attention and escorted to Fairbanks when they got to Circle.He said that the two,whowere more than likely brothers that had a pretty poor gold claim, were working up one of the Creeks in the area, and they were a couple of the town rowdies, and he had dealt with them several times in the time they were in the Circle area.

We went down to the boat launch area and watched as the boat arrived and we helped the ambulance driver put him in the ambulance.He had broken his upper leg, and the bleeding was controlled by a tourniquet that he had on his upper leg.He was advised that he would remain in custody at the Hospital in Fairbanks until they figured out how they would handle the attempted bank robbery in Canada.He arrested the other brother, and we returned to his office.I obtained a statement from the subject, and his brother was the first one to drop out of the ceiling and hit the railing.He lowered himself down and dragged him down the stairs and out to the boat, and they left.They had gone to Dawson City for the big celebration on the 17th of August and cased out both banks and figured that the Bank of Commerce was the easiest target as it was right at the river’s edge.They came back home and built the ladder,got some dynamite to blow the safe, and said that the dynamite caps were still in the boat.The Customs Agent came to the office all gussied up in his uniform, and he had contacted his superiors in Fairbanks, and he would not be seizing the aircraft if I promised to fly back directly to Dawson City owing to the seriousness of the attempted bank robbery.

With the difficulty of getting the brothers extradited back into Canada, no formal charges were pursued.I shared the cancelled cheques with the manager of the bank, and I continued togive away the “Robert Service cheques” until I was down to just two left that were dated 1910 to neighbours, friends, and acquaintances and I decided to frame them as well as “Traveller’s cheque” in the amount of $100.00 dated 1925,as mementos of the Yukon and my first and only attempted bank robbery investigation.

 

Dawson City flood in 1964



The flood caught everyone by surprise as the river ice broke in the middle of the night. I got up, dressed, and went from my room into the office. Looking out the window, I saw that the river ice was level with the top of the dike, which was the road past the Detachment. It was periodically stopping and then slowly inching forward. Dawson City is located right where the Klondike River dumps into the Yukon River, and in years past, the site of the settlement was likely the delta of the Klondike River. The roadway along the Klondike River and then the Yukon River had been raised about ten feet to prevent the water and the river ice from coming into town and extended the entire length of the town. They had flood water from the Klondike River in 1925 to enter the settlement. When they built the road between Whitehorse and Dawson City, they had the river road built higher to prevent flooding.

 

I had been present when they dug a hole in the ice earlier in the winter to test the ice, as they were intent on taking big trucks over to the asbestos mine being developed over at Clinton Creek. The ice was fifteen feet thick and was deemed safe for all traffic. We had an extended period of three weeks when the temperature had been -65°F. It had also gone down to -50°F on the 20th of November and did not come above that temperature until the 17th of March. It was my first winter in the Yukon, and there were many days when I questioned my decision to apply to go North. We dressed for the cold and planned any activities well around the extreme cold. I insulated the motors of the police cars to get some heat inside and defrost the windshield. The only time they were shut off was when we were filling up with gasoline or when they went into the garage for an oil change. We did a lot of patrolling up the creeks to check on the miners who worked their claims by tunneling underground and bringing the “pay dirt” to the surface for sluicing the gold out in the spring. We were always conveying food to them to stock up on their grub stake as they always had a food credit at the local store. We would patrol the creeks, take along their groceries, and check on their welfare. But some of those stories are for another time.

As I was watching the ice in the river, the side of a huge pan of ice roseabout six feet above the road and came partly across the road. The Yukon River, where it passes Dawson City, is between a half and three-quarters of a mile across, and it is fairly straight for about ten miles to the south. Then there is a bend to straight north, and about two miles further, there is an island in the middle of the river.

The Detachment building had the Cpl.’s married quarters that werea split level with a set of stairs leading to the access to the garage and back door, with the security bay garage attached at the back and a set of cement steps leading to the cells in the basement. There were three steps up from the office to the married quarters. My room was directly off the office, and access to the second bedroom was through my room.

To get to the basement, I had to go up the three steps through the married quarters, down a half flight of steps to the back entry, and then down eight steps to the door of the basement where the furnace was located, as well as the cells with the night guard looking after the prisoner(s). I was watching out the front window at the movement of the ice in the river, and you could hear the creaking and grating of the ice on the roadway. Suddenly, the guard let out a big yell and a very loud shout, repeatedly calling my name. I made my way through the Cpl.’s quarters and down the stairs to the basement, only to find the guard in the corner of the basement on his hands and knees in about six inches of water. There was a four-inch column of water going right to the ceiling and spraying all over. The prisoner was standing on his bunk, shouting to be let out. I asked the guard what he was looking for, and he said the key ring for the cell. He said he was sitting on his chair with it well leaned back and the key ring in his left hand when the gush of water hit him in the face and the keys went off into the corner. I told him I had better turn off the power to the furnace before he got electrocuted. I went in search of the electrical panel, finally found it in the front entry, shut the whole thing off, and went to my room to get my flashlight. Returning to the basement, now in total darkness, I joined the guard in the search for the key. By this time, there was over a foot of freezing water in the basement with a continuous spray from the spout of water from the basement drain spreading all over the room. Trying to orient myself with the flashlight beam, I went over to the prisoner to assure him that we would be getting him out quickly. He was standing on his bunk babbling along in the “Gwich’in” language, which I did not understand, but it sounded threatening. By this time, there was more than a foot of dirty water all over the floor, and the guard was still on his hands and knees, feeling around on the floor for the keys. Flashing the light around to orient myself and avoid the torrent of water shooting up from the floor drain, I caught a glimpse of the keyring near the books on the bench. I retrieved the key and opened the cell door, and by this time, the prisoner was crying and yelling at the top of his lungs. I piggybacked him to the stairs so he did not even get wet. By this time, the water was up over our knees. I changed my pants and socks and put on dry shoes. I took the police car, prisoner, and guard to his home so he could get changed out of his totally wet clothing.

We stopped for coffee at his cabin because he always had a really big pot of coffee brewing on the stove. He put a pound of coffee in this big tapered pot, and it continuously brewed on the back of the stove. As he drank it down, he added water and kept it brewing, and this was only, as he called it, “three times coffee.” When we came back towards the Detachment, the dike had been breached, with about six inches of water running over the dike the entire length of the town.

The backwater valve had obviously malfunctioned with the pressure of the twelve feet of water built up in the river and the drain that led from the basement to the river. We were then involved in moving the police cars, as well as my own car, boat, and trailer, to high ground. We also moved all of the stuff in the warehouse to higher shelves. Prior to the Alaska Highway being built, Dawson City had been the headquarters for the Yukon Sub/Division, and everything was stocked in the warehouse there. When Whitehorse became the new headquarters, there was no road connecting them, and freighting everything upriver by barge and paddlewheel boat was too expensive, so it was left in the warehouse in Dawson City.

We had a canoe, and we were paddling all over the settlement, checking on stranded residents and conveying them to higher ground. All of the sidewalks, made with 2x6 bases and the same boards crossway all over town, had floated away from their former location, making it impossible to navigate town as there werefive feet of water all over the flat area of town. It had caught almost everyone in bed as it occurred in the early hours of the morning. The water was around for a considerable period because they had built the dike to keep the water from entering the settlement, but there was no provision to let the water out until they dug a path through the dike. The hospital and the old Administration building, which were three-story buildings, housed most of the people whose homes were flooded. We hauled food from the stores to those buildings by canoe for over a week until we got food shipped in from Whitehorse by the truckload.

When the first pan of ice ran into the island with the sharp bend north of the settlement, the back end sunk down as it shoved up onto the island, and then the next half-mile pan of ice slid up onto the first until the ice was piled 50 feet high. The same thing happened at the junction of the Klondike River. When the ice hit the bend in the dike, the pan of ice tilted, and the next pan of ice rode up onto the first. With the major blockage at the island, the water level increased until it flowed over the dike and into town.

It basically stopped the river flow until it broke through at one side of the island and washed a deeper channel in the gravel of the river bottom, leaving piles of fifteen-foot ice blocks 50-60 feet high on the island and banks of the river. Along the settlement, they drilled holes in the pans of ice and dynamited them. The river finally went down to a flood level below the height of the dike, and with the dug drain, the water slowly went down throughout the town, and things returned to somewhat normal. The prisoner and I hauled the wooden planked sidewalks back to their original position and wired and stapled them to the buildings with about five feet of slack. Later in the summer, we had the fire truck wash most of them, and we painted them all down both sides of the main street.



 

Wolf Troubles

When I was stationed at Dawson City, I befriended a chap whowas the head of the Yukon Forest Service and Game Management, making him an ex-officio game warden.He lived in the settlement with his wife and two boys, and I often was invited to have supper with them.I worked with him studying the caribou migration, travelling the creeks to check on the miners for the Mining Recorder as a predator control in the two years that I spent at Dawson City.I had a good camera and a number of lenses.I did a lot of my own developmentand had a dark room set up in the basement of the detachment, as well as an enlarger.I flew an aircraft, and when the caribou began their migration in the spring and fall, I would go up to 10,000 feet and follow the herd and take pictures of the migrating Caribou.In the spring, we would follow the herd.I would take pictures and then blow thepictures up so we could count the number in the herd.Then in the fall, we would take pictures of them returning with their calves.This way, he could tell the birth rate and the overall health of the herd.

In the spring, we would take similar pictures and compare them to the numbers in the fall.So,we could then get some idea of the prediction of the herd in the Eagle Plain area from the wolves, wolverines, and bears.At the end of the second season of our amateurish herd count, it was obvious that the loss in number over the winter months was caused by extremely cold weather.And the wolf numbers had increaseddramatically, which was another reason whythe caribou count was down considerably.He convinced the Yukon Government to put a bounty on the wolves. To see if that would help.He put out poisonedbates on the roads that we could reach with his four-by-four vehicle when there were a number of woof tracks in the area.

The caribou in the Dawson herd is referred to as the“Forty Mile Herd” because they have been known to go on their migration and travel forty miles in one 24-hour period.They winter in the Eagle Plain, which is a couple of hundred miles northeast of Dawson City, and then in the spring, they go west of Canada and the U.S. border and calve and fatten up on the tundra south of Prudeau Bay near the Arctic Coast.The wolves drop off and welp their pups and continue feeding them on the local deer,moose, buffalo, rabbits, and bird nests, and very few, if any, of the wolves follow that caribou herd.

There is another big herd in the north end of the Eagle Plain and north of Old Crow to the Arctic coast, and they are referred to as“The Porcupine Herd.”The U.S. Fish & Game Department wasdoing a photo censusproject on that herd, and I checked out their numbers in 2018, the herd topped out at 83,000, and in 2022, they were down to 38,000, it is obvious that they will have to limit the indiscriminate hunting of the Indigenous people as a total food source.I have watched them shoot as many caribou as they had rifle shells, and their pickup would only take six or eight caribou, and they would say they were going to bring others out to pick them up, and you knew that was never going to happen.

At the end of the 19th century, around the tail end of the Klondike Gold Rush, the chief ofFirst Nations band warned against the overhunting of the Forty Mile caribou herd as a food source for local Indigenous communities that was then feeding an influx of hungry miners.Estimates of the herd’s population in 1920 put the number of forty-mile caribou as high as 568,000 animals. Just a decade later, that number dropped to roughly 10,000. By 1973, the herd hit a historic low of just 5,740 caribou. By limiting them as a food source for the natives,limiting commercial hunting for guides, and total ban onthe other hunting communitiesfor twenty years as well as wolf bounty, the numbers have increased to over 80,000 animals.It is a delicate balance in handling the way that the caribou are harvested.

I carried my personal rifle with me on patrol as we hadtwo cars and only one detachmentrifle that was kept at the Detachment for the use of the other four members if required. I drove the old Chevrolet station wagon that was equipped with a radio that was good for about 20 miles. It had s “STOP light on the right front fender that could be activated to flash for an overtake and attempt to stop a vehicle and a big cherry on the centreof the roof near the front.The wolves used the road to travel between the valleys to hunt and were car smart enough that when a car came along, they would leave the road and wait until the car passed and then come back on the road and continue their travel to the next valley.You would sometimes see packs of wolves of up to fifteen members.

I devised a plan when I saw a pack of wolves that I would wind up there.I put the car in neutral and coast to a stop, trying to duplicate the noise of a vehicle continuingon up the road.The wolves would be off in the bush and not see the vehicle stopped.As the vehicle sound was no longer audible, they would return to theroad to continue their track to the next valley.I would very quietly get onto the top of the station wagon. get into the sleepingbag with all my winter clothes on.Even though the temperature was -50 degrees Fahrenheit,there was a certain amount of heat coming through the roof of the car, so I could stay there for a considerable time and wait for them to return to the ploughed roadway.The plastic domeof the lightwas just the right height to rest the forestock of the rifle on and with the padded portion of the sleeping bag to help steady it.Then wait for them to come back out on the road and try shooting them using the round rotating plastic light as my rifle rests.It worked,but a lot of the shooting started a 200 yards, and wolves would head into the bush. By the time I shot a couple of them, they were outwards to 300 and 400 yards, and they never seemed to run in a straight line.

I revised my plan a little.When I spotted the wolf pack up the road, I would speed upand could cut down the distance to where they went off the road and into the bush.I would then put the carin neutral, turn offthe ignition, and let itdriveslowly to a stop.That way, the wolves would hear a decreasing noise and then silence as if the vehicle had departed.Then, very quietly, Iput my rifle and sleeping bag on the roof of the station wagon,got up on the bumper and fender area of the hood, and crawled into the sleeping bag on the roof.There was enough heat coming from the inside of the carthrough the roof that it was quite comfortableto spend a considerable time waiting for them to come back onto the road.There was a considerable amount of snow that winter, so they were going in on one track, and they just reversed in the trail and came back out onto the roadway to go to the next valley topredate the larger animals in the next valley.

This one pack of fifteen came out onto the road. Along with their leader, they all had beenjust lookingat the silent vehicle sitting just a hundred yardsaway. The leader was a huge wolf,head and shoulders abovethe rest of them, and he was the firstone that I shot. There was a lot of hesitation from not getting any messages from the leader.Then, four other wolves that started running away from the riflewent to wolf heaven.I reloaded, andI got two more of the fifteen of them.I weighed the leader on the government scales, and he weighed 180 pounds.I pulled them off the road and covered them with snow so they would freeze well.And I didnot get any blood on the inside of the vehicle.Icame back an hour later after I finishedmy patrol, loaded them all into the station wagon, and returned to the Detachment.

The sun does not come over the horizon for over a month, so it is just semi-light conditions that hamper good visibility forlong shots.In good light that Winchester .264 Magnum and the 3 to–9 power scope, I could put ten rounds in a five-inch aluminum pie place at five hundred yards.In the winter, we had over 400 miles of roads that were maintained in the winter, andwe had to patrol the area as it was -50 below in case someone broke down in the cold,and we had to check on the miners that worked their claims with tunnels down topay dirt and then sluice it out when the spring waters returned.

I placed the wolves out on the laneway to take some pictures, and others came along and took pictures as well.It was my intention to turn them over to the local natives whowere in need, and they could collect the bounty,they could skin them out, and sell the hides or use them for trimming parkas that some of the women sewed.I stored them in the Forestry warehouse.Being a member of the RCMP our Rules and Regulations stated that you were restricted to only $75.00 of money for fur In each year.



About a week later, I got a call from the Commanding Officer in Whitehorse, and he stated that somebody had sent that picture of me out to the American Press.And every “wolf lover” in North America wasup in arms and wanted a piece of meand hishide, and Ottawa Headquarters was rattling this chain.He told me that the only way that Iwas going to save myass, and especially his,wasby personally going to skin them out.Sendlots of pictures to the press and then send the hides out the the big fur auction in Winnipeg.When the hides are sold I wouldbe turning the money over to the local women’s “stitch and bitch” club in Dawson City as well as the bounty money and get as much press as Icouldorganize.

My next couple of weeks were spent thawing those stinking wolves out, skinning, salting, and stretching the hides out.Then packing them up and shipping them out to Winnipeg.I shipped them out to a taxidermist friend in Winnipeg and put him in charge of taking pictures and involving the press.I told him that he could buy what he wanted from the fur market because I filled him in on what I had been directed to do by my Officer Commanding, and I promised to send him a couple of the Yukon wolves out to him free of charge that he could mount and sell for his troubles.He bought the hide of the 180-pound male wolf for a big price and got some good pictures out to the press.I had already had him do a head-mounted rug of several animals:a wolf, wolverine, lynx, Artic white fox, martin, fisher, beaver, and muskrat, and a full mount of a weasel. He mounted several polar bears and a white wolf for relatives and friends as well for me..I went on hunting without any picture taking that could be sent out to the press, and all of the dust seemed to settle.With all the bounty moneyand money from the sale of the furs in Winnipeg, I was able to turn $11,000 to the local church ladies' group with lots of pictures to the press, and nothing further was heard from the Wolf Lovers league.

 When it warmed up after the 17th of March, I made a cross-country ski trip down into the Sixty Mile River from the “top of the world highway” to check on the wolf conditions in that area.It was an easy glide along to the top ofthe valley going down, and with binoculars, I spotted a pack of 13 wolves killing a moose. If the moose challenged them and did not run then they were left alone.If they ran, they were dragged down by biting the hindlegs until they went down in the snow, and the wolves literally ate them alive and went on to attack another moose.I did not go into the valley but just skied along the top of the valley, and I did not shoot any of those wolvesas I had no way of getting them up out of the valley, and it was not a pleasant site to watch them ham string the moose and eat the nose off and leave them to die and do it repeatedly but watched them takedown five moose in a matter of five hours. I fired at them when they confronted a cow with two calves and scared them away from them.I then had five hours of uphill skiing back to the car.Before the winter was out, I had done my part in reducing the wolf population, and I had killed 26 wolves.I volunteered to work all of the day shifts doing these long patrols over the 300 miles of roads that were maintained.

 

   

Trip up the Sixty Mile River



The name of the Sixty Mile River comes from the fact that it is located that distance up the Yukon River from Dawson City and in the Detachment area that we patrolled.This trip was whenwe went there to measure some claims, and our night guard accompanied me. He was planning to do some prospecting, and he got some financial support from the Yukon Government if he hired a Native cook who had just finished his six-month sentence and worked along with me in refurbishing the RCMP cemetery and other Municipal projects and became fairly close friends even after I taught him how to do a hard days’ work.When we were shovelling gravel, I would challenge him to try and shovel the same number of shovels full of gravel into the back of the station wagon that was setup with a heavy tarpaulin in the back of the vehicle.

I believe that I should give some background of our night guard.He and his brother came from Ukraine to Canada,got the lure of the Klondike Gold Rush, and made their way to Dawson City in the 1930s;by that time, the gold rush was over, and only menial jobs were available.They set themselves up to supply cordwood for the dozens of steamboats that still plied the Yukon River.They would choose a landing site for the boats and cut and stack the cordwood in full view, and the boats would pull in and take one or two cords of wood and leave the money in a baking powder tin.He lost his brother when a bank of the river collapsed, and he was swept away and drowned.

He next set himself up in a grocery and produceddelivery service to the miners whowere still working their claims during the summer, up and down the river and creeks by boat and in the winter by dog teams.On one of these grocery delivery trips by dogsled to Matson Creek up the Sixty Mile River in 1946, he found John Matson dead in his cabin and then went directly toDawson City and reported it to the RCMP Detachment. 

Matson is reported to have given Klondike Kate her weight in gold for wintering with him and they later in life got married.Kate, the Belle of the Yukon, was a vaudeville singer and dancer who made her name and fortune on the saloon stages of Dawson City during the Klondike Gold Rush.

The Corporal insisted that they immediately return, and he was to act as their guide.He objected as they had a spell of good weather, and he figured that it was about to change and get much colder.On the first day out, the temperature plummeted, and on the second day of the trip, it got to minus 75 degrees Fahrenheit. He was chopping wood for the fires and the head of the axe broke in the cold, and a splinter struck him in the eye.They immediately returned to the Dawson City Hospital to have the splinter of steel removed from his eye, and it resulted in him losing the eye and a glass eye that he had to pay for himself.

Because Ottawa had not approved him as a guide, they declined any compensation or pension for his disability.It became an unwritten understanding that he became a permanent night guard.He had a permanent and very comfortable three-room log cabin atthe northeast end of the settlement.In the winter, we provided transportation to the detachment and back home after his shift, and in the summer, he walked back and forth. He had a really big coffee pot continuously parkedon the back of the stove and just kept adding water and would be offering you “six times coffee” as he kept track of the number of times he added water, not to mention where he put the egg shells until the taste of coffee had diminished, and he replaced with a whole pound of coffee.Not often you had “one-time Coffee.”

There were a number of mining operations on the Sixty Mile River, and we took the Detachment 26-foot freighter canoe with an 18 HP engine. I did a few checks on measuring the length of the claims to assist the Mining Recorder and to keep the miners from extending their mining operations into the neighbour’s claims to try and keep them honest.

On the second day, we set up our big 12-foot tent on a gentle gravel bar at the mouth of Matson Creek, and he had given the cook exact directions that he was to put the bacon grease in the water and not anywhere on the rocks on the beach.I watched him go down to the river edge, and on the back swing, there was bacon grease coming out of the frying pan and onto the beach.He then realized his mistake and threw the more obvious grease-covered rocks out into the river.

With the perpetual daylight, we decided it was time to get some sleep.We had a metal grub box that was placed in the back of the tent.It was quite warm, so no stove was set up inside the tent, and there was a metal ring where the pipe would normally go through the roof of the tent.I was on a cot on one side of the grub box,Joe was on the other side, and the cook was near the entrance. Sleeping crossways, I had a light sleeping bag with a hood, and I only had to put mosquito netting over my face to fight off the nuisance of mosquitoes and black flies.Our rifles were leaning against a tree outside the corner of the tent.

I woke up to the stinking hot breath of a huge grizzly sniffing at my face and then sniffing at the grub box and scratching it with one paw. The cook had got out of the tent after the grizzly had stepped over him and,doing so, he ran into the rope that held that end of the tent and knocked the rope off the ground stake.The front of the tent collapsed inward with the two stakes holding it erect, making exiting the tent impossible for us or the grizzly.He was then trying to reach up to the light metal stove ring and knocked the back end of the tent down ontop of us.He managed to get his nose through the hole and tore the metal ring out of the tent and had most of his head out of the tent when the cook shot him in the head, and it collapsed on top of me.Joe made a quick exit, and my problems were not over. 

 The sleeping bag had a string tied at the top, and I was able to get the zipper pulled down from the inside to my waist level and get to the string at the top, but I was still immediately underneath this 500 pound of lifeless grizzly bear with the head of the bear stuck out through the tent with the metal ring on his nose area.I was still trapped underneath the bear and flattened into the collapsed metal-rimmed cot.

They managed to get the front of the tent back up and were able to come in and assess the situation.They tied a rope around my feet, and onto the metal frame of the cot and out to the tree, and by pulling the rope sideways, I was inched out from underneath the bear.They would take up the slack in the rope and retie it to the tree, pull it sideways, and finally get me out from underneath the bear. Part of the weight of the bear was born by the metal grub box but it felt that a lot of the weight of the bear was on top of me. And it seemed that my head was forever in the armpits of that bloody bear.

When I got out and got dressed, our next problem was getting the bear out of the tent. I decided that we would collapse the tent and tie the back of it to the trees and then use the long rope down to the boat and manage to pull the bear out of the tent using the strength of the outboard motor and the current in the river.We skinned out the bear and decided that we had enough excitement for one trip and headed back home.The cook sold the hide to a tourist, so he got a five hundred dollar bonus for his trip to the Sixty Mile River.

Note 

Here is a page of pictures depicting the Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation’s Number 6 dredge working on the Yukon River near Hunker Creek and the claim post on Bonanza Creek, on the claim that I had for four years. I used to take people up to my claim, where they could pan for gold at their leisure. It was about five miles out of Dawson City. You had to make$600 worth of improvements on the claim each year. The road up Bonanza Creek ran along one side of my claim. Most of the shoulder of the creek and the bottom had already been worked out, and the only original pay dirt was high up on the shoulder of the creek where the road went along. I had the grader operator make a big parking lot off to the side of the roadway, and in doing so, he moved the overburden, did the required improvements on the claim, and exposed a thin layer of pay dirt. The five and a half ounces in that small vial came from the pay dirt and my panning. I took countless gold seekers up to that claim, allowing them to experience gold panning and realize that being a gold miner involved a lot of back-breaking labor.

That was the sixth dredge that the Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation built to deal with the depth of gravel on the Klondike River. Number 5 dredge was used on Bonanza and Eldorado Creek, but it didn’t see much use due to the limited water flow. There was only a short window of time each year when the ground thawed, and they could dredge it as it froze again with the surrounding permafrost. I don’t recall where the other dredges were used, but some might have been in Alaska. I escorted the last gold shipment in 1966, which amounted to 285 pounds of gold bars. The company shut down at that time and abandoned everything where it was. Dredge Number 5 had been put upstream on one side of the pond, but a spring flood washed it into the pond and almost buried it. The Canadian Army later made a project to recover it, digging it out and putting it above the stream area, where it is now a tourist attraction. I believe Dredge Number 6 was dismantled and taken to dredging operations along the shore of one of the bays, but after a few years, a big storm and ice blocks destroyed it.

  

Stewart River’s trip from Dawson City



In late summer 1964, it was decided that the police had not made their presence felt upriver on the Stewart River, which is 77 miles upstream from Dawson City and flows east for another 175 miles. I was accompanied by our night guard, who wanted to see if there wereenough beaver and fur-bearing animals to consider applying for a trapping area in the Stewart River region. We stopped at the Burian residence at the mouth of the Stewart River, where they were raising a grizzly bear cub with the idea of donating it to a zoo in Calgary. They wrestled and played with the bear, as it didn’t bite or swat at them with its claws, and enjoyed the wrestling matches. I was invited to join in and was surprised by the strength of the little animal. When the bear grabbed your legs and got you down, it just walked away as if to say, "I won that round."

There used to be a thriving town nearby, which still had an airport, and the Burian family earned their living by gold mining on one of the creeks up the Stewart River, trapping and guiding hunters in the fall. Mrs. Burian served us a great moose stew and fresh-baked bread for lunch. I left ten gallons of fuel for our return trip to Dawson City.

The current in the Stewart River is quite fast in areas with many sandbars and rapids, followed by stretches of quieter flow. On the second day, we camped in a relatively quiet area of the river. During the night, the tent collapsed on us, and we woke up to over a foot of snow. We had difficulty getting a fire going to cook breakfast, as we hadn't collected any firewood. We decided to explore some of the streams off the main river to find a good grove of spruce where we could gather dead branches and get a fire started. While cooking breakfast, my companion managed to shoot five beavers in the backwater of the creek, so we spent the rest of the day skinning them.

We found trails leading up one of the creeks and came across a mining operation. A large cat (bulldozer) was clearing the overburden, and they were sluicing out gold from the pay dirt. It was a family operation: the woman was operating the cat while her father and son were shoveling pay dirt into the sluice box. They proudly showed me a baking powder tin full of gold, which was fairly fine, with very few nuggets. The father boasted that in the past two years, the nuggets had been much bigger, allowing them to invest in the cat and cover its transportation and fuel costs. He was surprised when I took out a big tape measure to check the claim post measurements, as theirs was the only placer operation on the creek.

The next day, we visited three other creeks with active mining operations. Two German chaps who had claims on Bonanza Creek had previously given me a set of nuggets that I made into a bracelet for my fiancée. I had known them from their visits to the liquor establishments in Dawson City. They had moved their mining operation by walking the cat and backhoe more than 50 miles from Bonanza Creek, up Hunker Creek, over the summit, and into the Stewart River watershed. They mentioned passing some mastodon heads that still had tusks.

When miners discovered these skeletons preserved in the permafrost, they would drag them away with horses so their claims wouldn't be shut down for archaeological digs, allowing them to continue working. In the early days, miners thawed the ground with steam, using huge boilers transported up the creeks by horse. They had crews cutting down every tree and brush to feed these boilers. Later, they realized they could thaw the ground by pumping cold water into it. Most of the land was nearly denuded before they discovered this method. Sixty years later, the trees had grown back profusely, making it difficult to move through the dense forest.

I later went and recovered two of the mastodon tusks—one was about eight feet long, and the other just over three feet. I tied the large one to a pack board and dragged the shorter one over the summit, following the cat and backhoe trail. It took me three days of struggle to reach the end of the road up Hunker Creek, where I had parked my police car.

When I joined the RCMP, there was a rule that you couldn’t get married until you had nine years of service. This changed to five years, then to three, and eventually, the rule was dropped as they struggled to recruit new members. When I requested permission to marry, the new rule required $5,000 in the bank. At that time, I didn’t even have a bank account, let alone any savings, so I began selling everything I had collected, including the mastodon tusks and gold jewelry I had made. With help from my close friend, the manager of the Bank of Commerce, I was able to produce the required amount to get marriage approval.

We continued upriver, traveling nearly another hundred miles to the bridge on the road between Whitehorse and Dawson City. We had lunch at the gas station and lodge and phoned the detachment to let them know we were alive and well and would be heading back downriver. We anticipated making a much better time with the current in our favor.

 

Time at Dawson City Postings



I spent most of the fall and winter of 1964 in training, and in the spring of 1965, I was posted to be in charge of the Carcross Detachment. There was a Corporal and his family, as well as two other Constables. We took turns doing the night shift and, during the day, patrolled the area and dealt with complaints as they came in. On night shifts, you checked the four liquor outlets, patrolled the town site, and made sure the drunks made their way home, ensuring that by 1:00 a.m., all was quiet. We had a jeweler who was nocturnal and worked making jewelry most of the night. I would drop in to visit and end up learning how to fashion gold nugget jewelry and weld it with gold. I designed a tie-tack with a dog sled in action, and he sent the drawing out to Vancouver to have it made so we could solder the gold plate onto the spring-loaded tie-tack. I had a set of nuggets given to me by miners that I befriended, which I soldered into a necklace as a wedding gift for my fiancée. I would do a tour of the settlement and then go back to helping the jeweler with gold nugget jewelry that he would sell during the summer tourist season. I made my “sluice box” wedding ring for myself and designed our wedding ring, engagement, and friendship ring that wrapped together. He sent the plans out to have them made up in Vancouver.



He had a great numberof gold nuggets with a lot of quartz embedded, which he paid the miners the going price of $35.00 an ounce, as they preferred selling to him instead of paying the processing fee when turning their gold into the bank. These made great tie tacks, cuff links, and jewelry pieces with the added sparkle of the quartz. Working with the Mining Recorder, he ordered a 500-foot tape. The area of the world-famous Klondike goldfields is located in an unglaciated part of the west-central Yukon Territory. They extend from the Klondike River south to the Indian River and from the Yukon River east to Flat Creek, covering an area of approximately two thousand square kilometers. There are rugged service roads and trails extending over most of the area. They used to thaw the permafrost using steam, with huge boilers that they kept making steam with by feeding the boilers all the trees and shrubs until some creeks were totally denuded. Then, they discovered that they could thaw the ground by pumping water into it. The Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation (Y.C.G.C.) built huge gold dredges that floated in the pond they dug on the Klondike River and Bonanza Creek. They were powered by electricity and had an endless bucket chain that brought the gold-bearing gravel up to a rotating screen that separated the larger gravel out, which went out the back on an endless conveyor belt and was dumped on the tailing piles.

On each side, there was a big pointed spike that went down to bedrock, and cables pulled it back and forth as the bucket chain dug up the layers of gravel. When that side was cleaned down to bedrock, and they could not turn further with the cable sets, they lifted the right spike, put the left spike down in the gravel, and continued to dig the gold-bearing gravel in the radius of the left spike into the dredge. When those two sweeps were complete, the cables were reset forward, and the dredge went forward in the pond that it had just dug. They let one side of the spike down and continued up the river or creek. The finer gravel and gold went over riffles, and the gold settled on the riffles while the gravel went onto the belt conveyor and out the back end. They would do a cleanup of the riffles regularly, and the gold nuggets and fine gold were conveyed to their processing plant, where it was heated and poured into gold bars weighing about 85 pounds each.

Around that time, there was a major gold theft from the mine in FlinFlon, Manitoba, and the security of the gold shipments was given high priority. The culprit made his getaway in his private plane but forgot to put sufficient gas in the plane to make it south to the U.S. border. He had to put the aircraft down in some farmer’s field in southern Manitoba. It was close to an RCMP detachment that observed the aircraft making an unscheduled landing and attended the scene, only to see the pilot hastily leaving the downed aircraft upon their arrival. He was arrested, and the gold shipment was recovered. As there were no security companies available in the Yukon, I was sent to the Y.C.G.C. gold room at Bear Creek, loaded some 285 pounds of gold bars in the trunk of the police car, and conveyed it to the Bank of Montreal or the Canadian Imperial Bank, where it was weighed. Then I moved the shipment to the post office, and when there was a scheduled plane arriving, I took the shipment in the trunk of the police car to the airport and accompanied it from Dawson City to Whitehorse. Another member took over security from there.

I was investigating a stolen car complaint and found thata vehicle did not navigate a turn in the road and went out into the tailing pond, which was 60 feet deep. I used my SCUBA gear and recovered the bodies of four of our locals. I climbed the steep shoulder of the tailing piles, and from the top, I took pictures of the pond and roadway. When I was about to begin going back down in the track of my last step, I discovered a gold and crystal nugget that was over an inch long and an inch across. It was evidently too big to go through the screen and went on up the belt to the tailing piles. I climbed a lot of tailing piles up and down the Klondike River and up Bonanza Creek in my spare time and never found another nugget.

Gold was pegged at $35.00 an ounce at that time. There were four leather satchels filled with gold bars with a total weight of 285 pounds. It never occurred to me at the time what the value of the gold was. Presently, in Canada today, it is $3,180.00 per ounce and is available in 24, 22, 18, and 14-karat gold per gram, ounce, tola, and kilogram.

In going around the creeks checking on the miners, we assisted the Mining Recorder by re-measuring the claim posts. This kept the miners more honest when the word went out that the RCMP wasmeasuring the position of the claim posts. The Mining Recorder mentioned that one of the claims was coming open, and I applied for Claim #4 below the discovery claim on Bonanza Creek. It had been worked out, and the only pay was high on the top of the embankment where the road was located. I dug through the overburden, and the pay dirt was only a few inches thick and consisted of really fine nuggets. This meant that I could take visitors and friends up there, and they could fill a five-gallon bucket of pay dirt, haul it down to the creek bottom about two hundred yards away, and learn to pan out the gold. It was only a few miles out of Dawson City, and the novelty of hauling the pay dirt down to the water source soon wore off for even the most enthusiastic gold seekers. You had to do $600.00 a year of improvements or pay the government that amount to keep the claim current. 

I was fortunate that the road went past my claim, and the grader operator enlarged my parking lot and removed some of the overburden of the pay dirt. I made sure he got a bottle of whiskey to keep the dust out of his throat. I managed to keep his throat clear for four years, and then I got transferred to the Northwest Territories after serving a year at Watson Lake, and the claim lapsed. I have a vial with five and a half ounces of small gold nuggets that I managed to keep for myself, and everyone who managed to get some left in the pan was able to keep their gold. I would always rework the sand where they panned for their gold, as there is a real knack to panning that comes with a lot of patience and practice, and I did not have to haul that pay dirt down the four hundred feet to get to the water.

In the winter, we went around the creeks and checked on the miners who stayed to work their claims. In the winter of 1964/65, it went down to minus 50 degrees on the 15th of November, and the temperature did not come above minus 50 until the 17th of March. There were weeks when it was -64. Two of the miners I found frozen, and one was rather difficult to get out of his cabin. It had a small door, and he had been lying on his bunk when he died, with one leg bent down to the floor and both arms over the side and down towards the floor. He was frozen stiff and was a fairly husky man to boot. Getting him out of the doorway, which was not that high, proved to be a big job. I was by myself and fifty miles away from help. The last I heard of that individual was that the undertaker was fighting with the Welfare Department because he wanted them to pay for warming up his facility to thaw him out to fit into a casket.

Our police car, which I mostly drove, was a Chevrolet station wagon. I insulated the motor, and it was never turned off except to change the oil. When you went up the creeks, you mostly drove on the frozen creeks as the roads were not plowed in the winter. I had all four tires with chains on, as the chains helped in steering on the front. I was going up Hunker Creek to check on an old Scotsman who stayed to work his claim. I had no idea how far I had come up the creek and was having difficulty where there was quite a rise at a rapids. I made quite a number of attempts and backed down further and further to get a longer run at the riffle. Just as I got up the grade, his cabin was on an outside bend of the creek. I went to the door and noticed that there was not much smoke coming out of the chimney. I pushed the door open and found him still lying sleeping on his bunk. When he woke up, he said that he had thought he had died and gone to heaven. He had used up all of his winter’s wood and put the last stick in the stove. He said he went to sleep, and when he half woke up seeing the lights on the frozen creek, he thought he had already died and gone to heaven, and he obviously went back to sleep. His brother had fallen down the shaft of their claim and died earlier in the fall. I had attended to that sudden death when one of the steps had come un-nailed, and he had fallen backward down some twenty feet of the shaft onto the bedrock. They had been shift-working, loosening the pay dirt and bringing it to the surface to pan out the gold when the water started to run in the spring. He did not discover his brother until he realized that he had not come to the cabin for supper. When he found him, he was frozen in the -20 degree of permafrost atthe bottom of the shaft. We had a heck of a time getting him out of the shaft on the windlass as he was frozen with his arms and legs at different angles.

He decided that he was going to give up working on his claim, and we loaded up everything he owned. He had run all of his pay dirt through a “Rocker System” in his cabin, as it had been too cold to cut any more wood to thaw any pay dirt. He said it had been minus 70 for over two weeks. I drove him back to the seniorcentrein Dawson City. He had two baking powder cans full of gold nuggets. I bought a small set of his weights, a handheld set of scales, and one of his “Carbide Lamps.” The carbide lamps worked by dripping water on the calcium carbide (CaC2) with water (H2O). This reaction produces acetylene gas (C2H2), which burns a clean white flame and produces very little carbon dioxide, so it can be used safely in confined spaces with a bright white light. About two weeks later, I was visiting the senior’s lodge, and he made a big deal and speech about me saving his life from freezing to death and presented me with his set of gold scales in a glass and wooden case. I guess that with each attempt to drive up the ice-covered rapids, the headlights would cross his cabin and light up the cabin’s frost-encrusted window and then go out for a period of time as I backed down the creek to make a longer run up the rapids.

I used to go over to the miner’s lodge regularly and take along a mickey of rum and a few bottles of coke until the matron caught on to all the merriment and forbade me from treating the old guys. It was very interesting to listen to their involvement in mining, and they mined on almost every one of the different creeks in the area. Each one kept the storyline very close to the truth as if they embellished the amount of money they made, where they were on the creek, and how many people they had working for them;the others would keep them in check as they were in the habit of correcting one another. I told the nurses at the hospital (where I bought one meal a day) about what had happened. All three of them were from England and had relatives who had made it to the Klondike. That interest had brought them to Canada and led them to volunteer to work in Dawson City. 

All three of them were taking notes with the idea of writing books when they returned to England, and they had never thought of visiting the old miners. The nurses’ handbags were never questioned, and I always checked in with the matron to show that I had taken her direction. Sometimes, we spent hours listening to what the miners related and reliving the good times on the creeks. Most of them told their stories of how they got there. Three of them had arrived in 1899 and were in their late 80s. They had come up the Chilkoot Pass after arriving at Skagway, built a boat near Lake Bennett, and came down the Yukon River. A couple of them had made millions and had spent it all hiring crews of workers looking for the “mother lode” and never struck it rich again. All three of the nurses were making notes with the idea of writing books. One of them got married here in Canada, and I lost track of the other two. Every time we went there, I had my heaven-bound miner relate the details of mysaving him from a trip to heaven. I still have his gold scales gracing the mantel on my fireplace, his “blow pan” and magnet to separate the “magnetite” that has very similar specific gravity to gold, some of his weights, and handheld scales.

I befriended the Manager of the Forestry and Fish and Game Department at Dawson City, and with his four-wheel-drive pickup truck, we traveled up most of the creeks in the entire Klondike area, visiting some of the active miners and measuring claims that were operational. What would happen is on some creeks, where every 500 feet, there was a claim and usually a cabin. Some of the creeks had only one cabin left, as the other cabins went into the fire of the last operational claim as it was cut and dried wood.

You would go into the cabin, and the plate, cup, and saucer would be turned upside down on the table by the window. The last active calendar was an indication of when it was last occupied, with the days crossed off. The lamp would have the shade alongside it, with a small box of matches underneath the cup so the mice could not accidentally light the cabin on fire. There was always kindling in the tin stove with “fuss sticks” whittled underneath the kindling and a pile of wood by the door. There would be a lantern, or some had a lamp with the shade alongside, and dried-up rings on the kerosene marking the winters since it was occupied. Depending on how big the cabin was, the bed would be opposite the single window or the larger cabins would have a double bunk in the back end, indicating that two people worked the claim.

One of the claims we visited had an old Italian who had a few good years and had gone back to Italy for the winter. He had a custom-built shotgun made for himself that was covered with silver filigree and his name set out in silver. He fell while hunting, and the barrel went into the snow. When he fired it next, the front of the barrel bulged, and he was afraid to fire it again, so I bought it from him as a souvenir. I also bought the .405 Winchester from him as well. He was quite a small man, and he had shortened the stock to fit himself, so when you fired it, not only did it kick like a mule, but it jumped up into your cheek. It came with two boxes of shells, and people have paid me to fire this big caliber rifle.

His story about the rifle was that he was crawling up a very steep hill on all fours, with his pack on his back, when he crawled into the belly of a big grizzly. The bear swiped the pack and knocked him, rolling down the hill. He returned directly to Dawson City and ordered the biggest caliber rifle that Winchester made. Teddy Roosevelt had the same caliber rifle when he went to Africa and was shooting elephants and rhinoceroses. I used it to dispatch wounded grizzlies right in Dawson City. When the Natives got drunk and did not attend the smoking fires under their salmon, they had to dry the fish rotted, and every grizzly that got a whiff of the rotted salmon headed for Dawson. They would try shooting the bears with their .30-30 rifles, wound them, and then call the Police to dispatch them. In one summer, I had to deal with six different grizzlies and five black bears that came into the settlement. For those not familiar with that caliber, the case is almost three inches long and about as big as your middle finger, with a round 500-grain slug. As the saying goes, “It kills both ends.”

 

Seizure of Illegal Two-Way Radios



I got a call from Whitehorse that I was to go near the top of the Chilkoot Pass and see if I could intercept and catch the two men who were bringing in dozens of illegal two-way radios. They had information that an American was transporting the radios up the Chilkoot Pass, and the chap from Whitehorse was going by railroad to Bennett Station and then walking the path to near the top of the Chilkoot Pass, locating the packsack of radios that had a locator beacon. He was then going to return to Whitehorse and sell them. They were poorly made and their use was disrupting the frequencies of the legal two-way radios in the area. The Alaska State Police had advised that they had information that the supplier had just purchased a large camouflaged packsack and would more than likely be involved in the delivery of the radios and would be going up the Seela Pass as the WPYR railway was shut down for a week or more for track repairs. I was to go immediately to see if I could intercept and arrest the people involved. I packed up some food, a tent, and camping gear and headed south on Lake Bennett with my detachment boat, then walked from the end of Lake Bennett to Fraser, which is where the RNWMP had set up in 1898 to check the Klondike Stampeders' supplies to ensure they had enough food for two years. I met with a number of hikers on the trail, some of whom were three generations of the same family.

I set up my two-man tent on a promontory overlooking the trail, almost half a mile back. My tent was a two-man, double-walled Arabian silk tent that only weighed nine pounds, so it was ideal for packing. I had binoculars and a spotting scope. In the first two days, there were a number of hikers going in both directions, and none of them had a camouflaged pack sack; they mostly appeared to be ill-prepared tourists. At the end of the third day, I was running out of food and decided that I would have to go down to Skagway. I went to the WPYR railway office and arranged to meet a member of the Alaska State Police. He happened to be one of the members I competed with in Anchorage at the Annual Pistol Competition between the RCMP and the Alaska State Police, and he had passed on the information to the members in Whitehorse. He was going to check the bars and the suspect’s residence to see if he was still in town. He phoned back about five minutes later to say that the suspect was in the bar two doors up from their office, so it was a good time to come to Skagway and get my groceries. He said that he had a red plaid jacket on. I hurried across the trail and down the Seela Pass and met him in his own jeep. He drove me over from Dyea to Skagway. 

I had a set of coveralls over my uniform shirt and pants, went to the bar, and had a drink and a good dinner.The suspect was playing cards with three other locals and had long curly hair, so he was very easy to spot. I bought some groceries, and he drove me back to Dyea. There is a gold seekers’ cemetery at Dyea where 37 gold seekers were killed by a snow slide when the Klondike gold seekers were lined up packing their 1,500 pounds of supplies up the 45-degree slope of the Seela Pass. It is surrounded by huge coastal spruce trees and is the most peaceful place that I have ever experienced.

I climbed back up the Seela Pass, which is easily a 45-degree angle, and had a good sleep when I got to my tent. Two days later, I spotted our curly-haired hiker walk off the trail to an area where the basalt face had deep cracks and place the pack sack in one of those deep cracks. It was obvious he was pacing the distance back to the trail, where he tied a big piece of yellow seismic tape onto the signpost that was pointing to Fraser (where the RCMP used to weigh the food of the gold seekers).

He immediately headed down the trail, and I followed him. We had arranged that the Alaska State Police would follow him out of Skagway, and if he dropped off the two-way radios, they would arrest him for the illegal importation and wait for him to come back down the Chilkoot Pass. He stopped to rest, and while he was resting, I talked to some other tourists who were on their way up. I told them that the WPYR Railway was not going to be running for another week due to some track repairs, so they would not be able to get a ride to Whitehorse or back to Skagway. I said if they camped at Bennett for a day, I would be able to give them a ride to Carcross and come back this way as soon as I had to deal with a bit of business further down the Pass. He rested for about 20 minutes and continued down the Pass with two more very brief stops. 

The Alaska State Policemen came out of the brush on either side, and he ran between them. One of them overtook him and tackled him, and he suffered a little road rash. He was surprised when I turned down my coveralls and displayed my uniform shirt. I told him that the radios he delivered last time had very poor frequency crystals and disrupted everyone else’s radios in the Whitehorse area. I said I would send them pictures and details of all the radios that were at the top so they could use the pictures for evidence, and I headed back up the Pass.

The seismic tape was still attached to the sign. I packed up my tent and camp and sat watching the area where he had stashed his packsack. Two hours later, our culprit showed up, and he paced the distance west from the sign after removing the tape came back to the trail, and headed towards Bennett. I followed him about 500 yards behind, and when he stopped to rest, I stopped as well. I allowed him to carry the packsack right to his boat before I approached him and told him that he was under arrest for the illegal importation of radio equipment. I handcuffed him to the steering wheel of his boat, relieved him of his gas tank, and shoved his boat out into the current of the river.

I went around to where my freighter canoe was parked and made contact with the man, his wife, and their two boys, getting them into the canoe. I tied a rope to the front of the other boat and had a pleasant trip back to Carcross. The man, his wife, and their two boys phoned friends in Whitehorse to come down to Carcross and pick them up at the detachment. I phoned Whitehorse, and the members came down to pick up their prisoner, who was hugging my flagpole. I made supper for the family and served my prisoner a fish sandwich and a cup of coffee. I laid out the 50 two-way radios, recorded all the serial numbers, and took pictures for the Alaska State Police. I turned the rolls of film over to the members to be processed at the Identification Section in Whitehorse. I understand he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to six months in jail. The American got a $10,000 fine, and since he was able to pay the fine, he must have been making a lot of money selling two-way radios.

 

Checking on the Prisoner Work Gang



The Yukon government had begun to improve the Chilkoot Trail that runs from the south end of Bennett Lake alongside Lake Livermore, although all of it is in the Province of British Columbia. They were doing it with the help of time-serving prisoners, and they had just one guard who kept them in line and working. My job was to check on them at least once every 6 to 10 days and transport prisoners who wanted to work outside while serving their time. I was also to provide transportation back to Whitehorse, bringing back chaps who had served their time.

It meant going the full length of Bennett Lake, some 25 miles by freighter canoe, and then walking the prepared trail to where they had their tent camp set up, another eight to ten miles, and hauling in some of their fresh fruit. Once a month, I hauled their fresh grocery order from Carcross and was met with the entire group at Bennett. They leveled out areas on the trail and built small bridges across the creeks, continuing that all the way to the top of the Chilkoot Pass by the Canada/U.S. border.

 

Looking after the Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development file



It seemed that at every detachment I was posted to in the North, whether temporary or permanent, I was detailed to handle the "Indian Affairs and Northern Development" (IAND) file. Today, it has received a name change to Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development. There were no Indian agents, as there were no Reserves in the Yukon or the Northwest Territories, so the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) handled all of the requests from the local Indigenous peoples and passed them along to the IAND department personnel in Ottawa. The RCMP also managed the distribution of food, nets, ammunition, and medical welfare.

In Dawson City, they had a local bylaw that prevented the local Indigenous people from staying within the Dawson City area after 9:00 p.m., or they would be arrested and held in the RCMP Detachment cells for 24 hours. When Jean Chrétien became the Minister of IAND under Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau’s Liberal government, the bylaw was rescinded, and the Indigenous people were no longer required to trek back to their settlement of Moosehide, about six miles northeast along the Yukon River. Many had comfortable cabins in Moosehide where they dried fish and used fish wheels, though some had permanently moved into Dawson City, living in makeshift accommodations dug into the hills or in tents.

I visited the settlement in Moosehide and found that cabins that had not been occupied for a short period ended up with their wood stoves being used by others, as people did not want to cut and haul trees into the settlement for heating. I identified this problem withIAND in Ottawa, and they asked me for a solution. A developer had proposed a project to build and rent original cabins for the tourist industry. The town had serviced six lots with water and sewer, and the developer had poured the cement basements. However, the developer ran out of money and left town without a forwarding address, leaving the lots abandoned. I got approval from the Town Council to have IAND take over the basement areas, and I sought funding to build six log cabins for some of the Indigenous people living in Dawson City.

Ottawa approved the use of the basement areas and provided a significant sum of money with the stipulation that mostly local Indigenous people be hired for the construction work. A local carpenter/contractor took on the project, and I arranged for local Indigenous workers to accompany him south of the airport along the Klondike River to cut and peel the logs for the buildings. A local trucker hauled them into the site. I kept track of the hours the workers logged and arranged for them to be paid each week, though much of their earnings went to the four liquor establishments in town.

Construction began with local Indigenous help. Since there wasn’t enough gypsum board (gyproc) available, we decided to use 3/8" plywood for the walls, which would be painted. The walls were insulated, and a 2" x 4" frame was installed to support the interior plywood. The kitchen included a sink and cupboards, with a living area centered around a "Box Stove" with a glass front. There were two bedrooms and a bathroom, with large windows in the living room and smaller windows in the kitchen and bedrooms. The kitchen and bathroom were located close together for plumbing convenience. The cabins were equipped with lighting and plenty of electrical outlets.

The roof was insulated and covered with red metal cladding to prevent fires from sparks. The ceiling was also insulated, and plywood sheeting was installed with ceiling lights. All the corner logs were trimmed off with a chainsaw as they were random lengths, and the blocks from the windows and doors were piled beside the steps of each cabin, intended as winter firewood. All that was left for the residents to do was cut the blocks to size and split them for the stove.

Three of the local Indigenous workers stayed on the project until completion and were chosen to house their families in the cabins. I also invited two elderly couples, both in their 90s, from Moosehide to move into the new cabins since they would need assistance during the winter to obtain food from the Dawson City store. For the remaining cabins, I placed the names of eligible residents in a hat, and the Mayor of Dawson City drew the names. The Chief’s name was drawn first, and I ensured the process was fair and transparent.

I took many photographs of the construction process, from the initial log cutting to the final completion of the cabins, with smoke rising from all the chimneys. I sent these photos, along with a report on the former living conditions of the residents, to IAND.

I issued welfare checks to many of the residents during the winter. However, the Chief insisted I deliver the checks to them directly rather than arranging for payments to be made at the stores. During routine patrols of the bars, I noticed that only one establishment had a large Indigenous clientele after welfare checks were issued. Suspicious of the situation, I arranged for the checks to be delivered directly to the stores, ensuring that the correct amount of money would be spent on groceries. I discovered that the owner of the Westminster Hotel and Bar had been receiving groceries in exchange for drinks. I notified the store owner, who allowed me to mark hundreds of items with my initials. After issuing the welfare checks, I obtained a search warrant and found 39 items in the hotel with my markings. The owner was charged, found guilty, and fined $500. He was also required to reimburse IAND for the value of the items.

Unfortunately, by spring, only two of the log cabins remained occupied. The others had suffered roof collapses from the snow load, as residents had burned the interior plywood, studs, and ceiling trusses for firewood. The kitchen cabinets, doors, and plywood were also burned. Only the two elderly couples were able to make use of the blocks of wood left outside their doors. I sent a final report to IAND, including photos of the damaged cabins, but received no reply. Similar issues were common in Reserves, where many homes were left unoccupied and in disrepair.

In Carcross, the Indigenous people lived in log cabins along the river opposite the settlement and crossed the railroad bridge to get into town. After one person fell from the bridge and drowned, I requested funding from IAND for a footpath and railing on the bridge. The project was approved, and after getting permission from the White Pass and Yukon Route railway in Skagway, the footpath was completed. The Yukon Transportation Department foreman used a Bobcat to create a comfortable roadway along the front of the cabins, and I arranged for IAND to cover the cost of fuel and the operator's wages.

In Watson Lake, I handled the IAND file for a band living at Upper Liard, about ten miles west of town. This group also had ties to Lower Post, British Columbia, about 35 miles south. Since the Lower Post group had a Reserve and an Indian Agent, I suggested that the agent could manage welfare checks for both Upper Liard and Lower Post. Ottawa accepted the idea, which angered the Indian Agent but made things more efficient.

When I was transferred to Fort McPherson, I again handled the IAND file. I coordinated hunting and fishing efforts for the senior citizens, who preferred traditional foods over store-bought goods. I arranged for hunters to gointo the mountains to hunt caribou to bring back one caribou for the seniors, but they were initially hesitant to share outside their immediate families. I accompanied them on several hunts, and one trip resulted in 26 caribou for the settlement. I knew the area well and directed them to a large herd on a mountain bench. With our skidoos, we managed to approach the herd undetected. Using my .264 Winchester Magnum rifle and scope, I shot my allotted six caribou, and we brought them back to the settlement.

We also set nets in the river to catch fish for the dogs, and once enough fish was stored, the surplus was distributed to the seniors. Late in the winter, I spotted three bull moose near the settlement. I took two elderly men, both in their 70s, in a three-board toboggan behind my skidoo. They crawled through the snow to get close to the moose, shooting them from about 50 feet away. The moose were gutted and transported back to the settlement, where the meat was distributed to the 600 residents. My first year’s budget was only $79,000, including the cost of nets, shells, and supplies for over 600 people.

We received a directive from Ottawa to dispatch the dogs and harnesses to trappers, hunters, and fishermen in the settlement, with some being sent to Aklavik. As a result, more fish went to human consumption. The RCMP was testing snow machines to replace dog teams in the North, and I was tasked with assessing which brand to purchase. I had been advocating for this change for six or seven years, and I was finally able to test two brands for suitability.



I had purchased my own double-track Skidoo when I was at Watson Lake and used it extensively, but I knew it was quite heavy. It required a lot of adjustments, with the double track needing almost double the maintenance, and you had to be fairly mechanically inclined to deal with repairs in the field.

They sent one Bombardier “Alpine” Skidoo that weighed about 250 pounds and an Evinrude that had reverse and electric start. The tracks had steel bars across them, and the Evinrude weighed nearly 500 pounds. If you got stuck in the snow or on a slight grade when backing up, the back end of the skis would dig into the snow and almost stand straight up, making it difficult to get the machine out and underway again. Most of the trails ran on the ice of the rivers and creeks, which usually had 15 to 20 feet of steep banks. The Evinrude often had to be winched up these slopes, but the Skidoo, being much lighter and more responsive, could get enough momentum to make it up most of the banks with ease.

When there were clear ice riffles with any slope, the steel cleats on the Evinrude’s tracks couldn’t pull the machine up, let alone tow the three-board toboggan I built, which carried fuel and camp gear. On the trail, to service the Evinrude engine, you needed a tent large enough to hold a stove and cover the machine, as we normally de-carbonized the engine while on patrol. The mixed fuel caused it to carbon up quickly. However, with the Bombardier Skidoo, you could simply disconnect the fuel line, throttle cable, and four mounting nuts, remove the drive belt, and carry the Rotax engine into the heated tent to work on it.

I was tasked with reporting on the functionality of the different snow machines for the RCMP as they were deciding which to purchase to replace the dog teams. It became a simple decision, as the features of the Ski-Doo made it the clear winner. On a ten-hour day with dogs, you might make thirty miles depending on snow and trail conditions, and then you'd have to cook a warm meal for the dogs before getting your own supper. You'd have to run a good portion of that mileage just to keep from freezing. With the snow machine, you could go 40 miles in the first hour, and with a windshield, you just had to layer up on clothing to stay warm. The Bombardier Skidoo gave off some heat from the engine and exhaust, but the Evinrude’s engine was completely shielded by fiberglass, so no heat reached the operator. The Evinrude also used double the fuel of the Ski-Doo due to its bigger engine and heavier weight, so it was easy for Ottawa headquarters to make the right decision on which machine to choose.

During the early summer, we welcomed Jean Chrétien, then Minister of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development, to Fort McPherson as part of his summer tour. At a town hall meeting, the chief complained that the RCMP wouldn’t give him any more shells. I straightened out the situation and explained to the gathering that I had issued the chief twice as many shells as anyone else, and he had fired them all off in a drunken stupor at Christmas, going from house to house drinking. I also explained that my budget to support the more than 600 people was only $72,000, thanks to all the land food I was able to bring into the settlement. Chrétien told the gathering that they wouldn’t have to worry about any more poor treatment from the RCMP, as he would have their own Indian Agent working in Fort McPherson by the first snowfall, the first for the Northwest Territories.

I had gathered all the native crafts that the whites had purchased and displayed them on a few tables in the Community Hall, with signs in English and French saying that these items were not for sale and had been purchased by members of the community. There were gauntlets, moccasins, mukluks, an embroidered shroud parka, and our daughter’s “baby belt,” with her full name and date of birth beaded on a moose hide band. I was in full red serge uniform standing behind the tables when I saw Mrs. Chrétien pick up the baby belt and put it in her handbag. I told her that the baby belt belonged to my daughter, it was not for sale, and I would appreciate it if she returned it to the table. She spoke to one of her aides in French, and I understood what she said as she walked away. She told him to “fix it up with him, and he can get another one made.”

I told the aide I wouldn’t allow her to commit theft and that she was obviously a kleptomaniac. If she didn’t return the belt before she left Fort McPherson, I would charge her with theft, and a warrant for her arrest would be waiting when she got back to Inuvik. He offered me $100, but I explained I had paid $200 for it, and the woman who did that quality of beadwork had passed away, so it couldn’t be replaced. I continued to follow Mrs. Chrétien to ensure she didn’t dispose of it and watched her board the DC-3 at the airstrip. As the aircraft taxied to the end of the airstrip to begin its takeoff run, the rear door opened, and the baby belt was thrown out into the mud. I recovered it after they took off.

About half an hour later, I was on the phone with the Officer Commanding Inuvik Subdivision, who wanted to know what I had done to offend Minister Chrétien. I explained the situation, mentioning that we had signs in both English and French and that I knew Mrs. Chrétien understood English as she had spoken to the native woman staffing the tables. I told him I believed she was a kleptomaniac. He assured me I had done everything right and properly and that he would handle Mr. Chrétien and try to smooth things over.

A month later, I got a call from one of my troop mates in Ottawa, who told me that Chrétien had been discussing my case with the Officer in Charge. My name and regimental number were well-known to Chrétien, and I was apparently not in his good books. I like to think that when I retired as a corporal 27 years later, I could credit Jean Chrétien and his meddling with the upper echelons of the RCMP for my lack of further promotion.

True to his word to the local Aboriginals, he found an Indian Agent in Île-à-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan, who wanted to move to Fort McPherson. The agent was married, with four kids of his own and five native foster kids, as well as a manservant. They required four houses to be barged in, set up, and attached to the Utilidor (which provides water and sewer from the power plant in a heated insulated box). He also needed an office, a secretary, a vehicle with a garage, and he planned to teach the locals how to manufacture and sell tents.

He measured the amount of canvas required to go across the floor of a tent, up the wall, over the roof, and down the other side and ordered a roll of heavy-duty canvas that was 28 feet long. I pointed out that the tents we had were sewn together with a double-stitch sewing machine, so he ordered two of those machines as well. He even arranged for an old sailmaker from St. John's, Newfoundland, to be flown in to instruct the locals on how to use the machines and make tents.

He didn’t consider that most people in the North already had tents, so there wasn’t much of a market for them. He then had his wife take over the job as postmistress, causing a local native woman to lose her job without a pension.

I began adding up the cost of all the buildings, the vehicle, the freight to get them delivered, the cost of getting them set up and serviced in the settlement, the canvas, the sewing machines, and the transportation and wages for the Newfoundlander. I estimated the total to be far in excess of three million dollars.

He hadn’t arranged a phone system for his office, and I received a call from the airline that had loaded the huge roll of canvas onto a DC-3. They were asking which company would handle offloading it when it arrived. They had flown it 500 miles after loading it with great difficulty and were ready to send it to Canada after getting all customs approvals and payments sorted out.

I asked the person on the phone if they knew where Fort McPherson was in the Northwest Territories, and he said the pilots would take care of that—he had no idea that it was over 3,000 miles away. When I told him there was no company to handle the offloading and that we only had a D-4-sized Caterpillar in the settlement, he said that would be enough to pull the canvas out of the aircraft and that the plane would arrive next week. He explained that the canvas roll was on an eight-inch pipe sticking out about four feet on each side, with holes for attaching chains. The canvas was wrapped in thick plastic and should slide out of the aircraft, which had large freight doors at the back. However, the wheeled trolley system they used to load it had been left behind by the manufacturer.

I relayed this information to our Indian Agent, who worried that they couldn’t leave the $35,000 roll of canvas on the sandbar. He asked how I could help get it up to the Community Hall and start tent-making. Aside from using the Caterpillar to pull the roll from the aircraft, it was clear he had no idea how to transport it from the sandbar to the settlement.

I didn’t want to see more taxpayer dollars wasted, so I started thinking of ways to get the massive canvas roll into the Community Hall. There were two old metal sleigh bunks that the army had abandoned after a post-WWII exercise across the North. They had left them, assuming they wouldn’t last the rest of the trip. I dug them out with the Cat and welded a pipe in the centre, with plenty of braces. I also added a rotating unit on top with a half-pipe to accommodate the eight-inch pipe from the canvas roll and chained them 42 feet apart, dragging them down to the edge of the sandbar.

I received several calls from the pilots, and I described the location and size of the sandbar, assuring them it had been used by several DC-3s and twin Beech 18s over the summer. The sandbar was hard-packed gravel and sand over a mile in length. I mentioned my blue-and-white aircraft parked on the east side. I also explained that we were 35 miles up the Peel River from the Mackenzie River delta and 78 miles southwest of Inuvik. I suggested they use the Inuvik beacon to guide them and told them they could refuel there, as it had a paved runway with all the necessary facilities and accommodations.

I organized a large number of people to help unload the roll of canvas. We attached a big rope to the aircraft’s tailwheel so the people could pull the tail sideways as the canvas was unloaded. The Indian Agent paid twenty people to help when the aircraft arrived.

The plane arrived on the scheduled date, making several circles around the sandbar and settlement, lowering each time until they spotted the windsocks I had mounted on both ends of the sandbar. They landed into the wind, using only part of the runway, and taxied up near the roadway leading to the settlement. The loadmaster was surprised by our sleigh bunk setup for handling the canvas roll. He had me position the D-4 Caterpillar far enough back to pull the roll straight out of the freight doors at a slight incline.

The helpers managed to get the rear sleigh bunks under the pipe at the end of the canvas roll, and I chained it to the post through the holes in the supporting pipe. They started the aircraft and moved it forward until the end of the pipe was clear of the freight doors. The rear sleigh bunks were positioned for support, and I used the Cat to lift the pipe onto the bunk. The aircraft then took off towards Inuvik.

The task of maneuvering the sleigh bunks with the roll was a matter of pulling it forward with the Cat while using ropes and chains to steer it around the corners and up the switchbacks. The Jeep helped direct the rear sleigh bunk up the steep turns, adjusting the chain lengths as needed.

When we finally reached the settlement, it took a few more turns to keep the rear bunks on the road. At the Community Centre, I positioned the roll in front of the ramp leading to the big doorway. I lifted the rear bunk with the Cat, so the roll would go straight into the building. After drilling a hole through the opposite wall, I passed a cable through and hooked it to the Cat's blade, pulling the roll of canvas into the building across sheets of plywood to protect the hardwood flooring. Once inside, we removed the chains and excess plywood, closed the freight door, and figured that my work with the Indian Agent was done.

 

Hard lesson on learning the social structure of local natives



With very few jobs for the Aboriginals, there was little to no wage-earning work within the settlement, and a number of minor offenses occurred that required court time and sentences to be meted out. The local Justice of the Peace (J.P.) decided that as punishment, offenders would have to deliver to the R.C.M.P. compound a quarter cord of wood for a first offense, half a cord for a second offense, or, for more serious infractions, a full cord.

It seemed easy enough to do, as most families had a dog team, and it was just a matter of cutting down trees in the immediate area of the settlement and hauling them into the police compound. I built storage areas to facilitate the four-foot-long bolts of trees, stacked four feet high and four feet wide. Once the wood was delivered, I would cut it into firewood lengths and split the pieces with the RCMP-lettered punch on both ends to prevent theft, then advise the local J.P. when the fine had been paid in full.

I would strike the RCMP marking by simply hitting the area with the back of the axe head, then cut it up and deliver it almost daily to the elderly in the settlement. We had eleven people in the settlement over 80 years of age, five over 90, and three ladies over 100. I had to deliver wood on a daily basis during the winter, as anything left outside would be stolen overnight.

I set a trap for the would-be wood thieves. I placed four extra pieces of firewood by the oldest lady’s door. I had taken shotgun shells, cut the cartridge so there were no pellets, drilled a hole in one end of the stick of wood, and inserted the cartridge, followed by a wooden plug. By morning, two of the cabins had a surprise blast that startled the thieves. After that, spare wood could be left outside untouched for days at a time.

There was a noticeable decrease in petty crime, likely due to the stigma of having to supply cordwood to the RCMP compound and cut the logs into the required four-foot lengths. The offenders never seemed to connect the fact that the wood was delivered to people outside their immediate families, which didn’t sit well with their social structure. It was a simple task to fell three 32-foot trees, tie a rope to their dog team and toboggan, and, in an hour’s work, pay off a quarter-cord fine.

When Jean Chrétien moved from the I.A.N.D. Ministry to becoming Justice Minister, the Liberals passed a bill that prisoners could no longer be made or allowed to work in prison. A few weeks later, we received a memo stating that our wood-cutting practice was to stop immediately, meaning prisoners no longer had to make license plates or mop the floors of their facilities. I imagine our local chief had a direct line to Chrétien’s office to get that memo through in such a short time.

I was troubled by how I would provide wood for the seniors the next winter. I made a deal with the chief’s brother: I would help him cut a supply of cordwood, buy the wood from him, and use my barge to haul it to the settlement. I would also pay him for delivering the wood to the 19 seniors’ residences. In early summer, we took the RCMP’s 26-foot freighter canoe to an old burn area upriver, about sixteen miles away, and camped. Over five days, we cut and piled about 15 cords of wood on a high bank. Both of us were completely black from cutting, hauling, and stacking the charred wood, so we returned to the settlement to get clean clothes and take a bath.

The very next day, we hauled the barge upriver. As we headed upstream, we encountered floating logs—cordwood sticks drifting in the river. We recovered what we could, but when we reached the area where we had piled our wood, we found that the locals had thrown all 15 cords into the river. They couldn’t stand to see anyone get ahead; everyone had to be dragged down to their level. It wasn’t going to be my concern anymore, as we now had this "wondrous" Indian Agent to look after all the settlement’s needs, and I turned the I.A.N.D. file over to him. 

Major accident south of Watson Lake



On the 16th of July, 1967, we received a report of a major accident at the “Nine Mile Hill,” about 90 miles south on the Alaska Highway. The reason it is called the Nine Mile Hill is that it truly is a hill that goes down the side of a valley for nine miles, then crosses a bridge and goes back up the other side of the valley on a more gentle climb out of the valley. It was reported from the Fireside Inn (Mile 543), which is located just south of the hill. They had a chap who got a ride with a semi-trailer with a flatbed full of bags of cement. Evidently, the trucker lost his brakes and, trying to shift down, lost a gear. The truck was in a runaway condition, and the driver told him to jump out of the truck, which he did when they were about 50 miles an hour. He received a lot of road rash and would need hospital treatment. Another tourist reported that he saw the truck and trailer leave the road at a bend just short of the bridge and go off into the bush. It was going at a terrific speed, and there was nothing to see after that other than the cloud of cement dust off in the bush. They came directly to the lodge and reported the accident.

I dispatched the ambulance from the fire hall in Watson Lake and phoned Fort Nelson, requesting that they dispatch a couple of big wreckers because our only big wrecker from Watson Lake was on a trip to Whitehorse with a big truck from an accident the day before. I headed out to investigate the accident.

Arriving at the accident scene, there were the usual gawkers gathered where the truck had left the road. I was directed down the path of destruction through spruce trees that had been sheared off, with cement dust everywhere. Some of the trees were about a foot in diameter, and the truck stopped just a few feet short of going into the river. The driver was dead and still behind the steering wheel. The cab was full of big and small branches, and he was killed by the heavy tree branches that had him pinned in the cab of the truck.

I took pictures of the truck and the broken path back to the road, then went about removing the dozens of branches that were stuck into the cab. I got him out of the truck and into a body bag and, with the help of a couple of men, got the body out of the bush and into the back seat of the police car. The ambulance stopped with the injured man, and he briefly told me how he was instructed to jump out of the truck. I advised him that I would visit him at the hospital in Watson Lake, or if they released him, he was to go to the detachment and give them a statement.

I drove back to Watson Lake, got a sandwich, and headed out to Whitehorse to take the body to the coroner’s office. Jantje was about due to have our baby, and I told her that I would not stay over in Whitehorse and would get back as quickly as I could. I drove from Watson Lake (mile 635) to Whitehorse (mile 918), and on my way back, the radio responded when I was at the lodge, fueling up at milepost 777. I was refueling when I was advised that we had a baby girl, later named Sherry Lee Dunn. That is why I started out knowing the exact date of the accident. One of the members, who was very familiar with alcoholic beverages, made the suggestion, “That it was very nice to have a little Sherry around the house,” and that sort of appealed to us both. I am not certain where Lee came from, but for 57 years, she has been a pleasure in our lives. She was suggesting that 7 was her lucky number; she was born in 1967 in the seventh month, and I found out that she had been born when I was at milepost 777 on the Alaska Highway.

 

Murder near Watson Lake, Yukon Territory 1967



I was on a routine patrol going west on the Alaska Highway, about ten miles east of the Hotel and Service station, which is at Mile 777, and I saw a Raven come out of the bush from the north side of the road and continue to fly just ahead of me, and the ravel was having difficulty with the big white object and staying in the air with the load. He was only able to fly about ten feet above the roadway.It had a big white thing in its beak, and I was curious to see what it was carrying.

I pulled up and almost overtook it and still could not make out what it was, so I braked to a stop and quickly got out of the car and discharged my sidearm in the air several times, and it dropped the object into the center of the roadway.I pulled forward and got out, and it was the major part of the back side of a human skull with very fresh meat on the lower area and some long hair.I took a picture of it on the roadway, and with traffic coming, I opened the trunk and put it into an exhibit bag.

I was about to drive on to Mille 777, and going to phone. The Watson Lake Detachment when the Sgt. called me on the police radio.It was unusual that we could get radio coverage more than 20 miles, but I was on the top of one of the higher hills near the watershed, and I was hearing him with radio loud and clear, and I was a good 140 miles away from the office.

He related that he had a very, very distraught lady in the office, and she had been picking raspberries at several borrow pits going all the way up to Mile 777 and had lunch there.

“Borrow Pits” are where the gravel that they used to build up, the grade of the road, and because most of the area was glaciated thousands of years ago, there was always a fine grave at some depth of the borrow pit. When they were building the Alaska Highway, they would find a great deal of gravel, and they would take that gravel, haul it out, and put it on the roadbed that they were building with big shovels, trucks, and big earthmovers pulled with D-8 Caterpillars.In some areas where there are no hills, these borrow pits are sometimes located a couple hundred yards apart.

She indicated that she continued to pull into any of the borrow pits that had easy access to pick more berries on the way back home. She had no idea how many stops she went into on the way back home and met people in some berry pickers. A number of them that the people were also berry pickers, and they were counting both sides of the road. She found a good patch of berries at the back edge of a big borrow pit.She had been there ten or fifteen minutes and had been in the berry bushes about ten minutes, and working her way into the middle of this good bush and stepped forward;when she looked down, there was a body that had no head.It was a big borrow pit, and she had made her way around the outside of the borrow pit;the car was over at the other side of the borrow pit, and she ran for the car and headed for Watson Lake as fast as she dared, and she came directly to the Detachment office.He suggested that I go to the Mile 777, and try and get the time she was at the restaurant.I asked if I could wait and not go to check at the restaurant because I had the better part of the missing part of the human skull, and I just finished putting it in an exhibit bag in the trunk of my car. I am sitting alongside the entrance to the borrow pit where the skull came from. I told him the skull was fresh with still some fresh blood on it.

He asked how I got it, and I related that I saw the Raven come out of a big borrow pit on the north side of the road, and it had dropped it in the middle of the road when I fired in the air, and I had just got back in the car from putting it in an exhibit bag in the trunk.He said two of the recruits had just arrived, and he would be sending them both out to guard the scene until the Identification Section arrived from Whitehorse. I was to guard the scene until the recruits arrived, and I was then to come back to Watson Lake and get some rest as it was going to be a long day tomorrow.

 I told him to have the recruits stop off in Watson Lake to get food for their supper and breakfast as I was not sure how far I was from the restaurant at Mile 777.

I finished talking on the radio and got out to examine the entrance to the borrow pit and two different tire tracks had dug up dirt coming out of the borrow pit and heading in the direction of Watson Lake.One was a car, and it drove over the larger tire track that possibly could be a pickup truck, so he could put out that we were looking for the suspect (s) in a pickup truck and possibly heading south.I got onto the radio, advised the Sgt. of my findings, and told him I would park where the lady had parked until I figured the recruits would be arriving and would then meet them on the road so they did not disturb the tire tracks at the entrance.

I followed the car tracks over to where she had parked, and it was obvious that she was in a hurry to leave because there was gravel dug up for fifty feet from where she had parked.I walked the circumference with my rifle at the ready and found where they had a campfire and tramped down grass where they had a six by eight-foot tent by the marks left in the grass and the stones where the fire had been were still warm.I did not disturb the raspberry bush, where the body was supposed to be, and waited a couple hours in the car, and then went out and parked on the Highway. 

 They arrived, and I briefed them on the location of the body and where to park to not disturb the area where the body was supposed to be located.I pointed out a big pile of dirt on the north side of the borrow pit;if the culprits returned for the body, it would give them some cover, and I gave them some of my bug spray as they were a bit of a nuisance most times in the Yukon.I drove up to Mille 777 to get an exact measurement of the scene from that point and briefed the owner that I was to meet the Member from our Whitehorse Identification Section here in the morning.I measured the distance to the borrow pit was 10.4 miles east of Mile 777.

The Alaska Highway, or Alcan Highway was built during the war when there was concern that Japan was going to be invading Alaska and the west coast. 

 Dawson Creek B.C. is at Mile Zero and was at the end of Steel, where troops and equipment landed to begin the construction of the highway to the military base at Fairbanks, Alaska (mile post-1420) 

 An interesting thing happened at Dawson Creek at the beginning of the construction: the military brought what they thought would be sufficient dynamite to be used to build the highway and piled it about half a mile off to the north of the airport in a line that was more than half a mile long. 

During the night, a terrific explosion occurred, and the entire stock of dynamite exploded.It is currently filled with water and In their seaplane base at the airport, parallel with the main runway and about ten feet deep and fifty feet wide.Mileposts were erected at every one of the bridges and summits as the highway passedover three mountain summits as well as the established towns en route. 

Fort St. John is at mile 42, Fort Nelson is at milepost 300, Liard River Hot Springs is at milepost 446,and Watson Lake is at milepost 635. Whitehorse is at milepost 918, and Haines Junction is at milepost 1016.Beaver Creek is at the border between the Yukon and Alaska, and the milepost was1271, and it terminates at Fairbanks, Alaska, at milepost-1420.Fuel stops,restaurants, and motels grew up to service the traffic, and they were given milepost designations as well.

I drove the 142 miles back to Watson Lake, got some sleep, drove the same mileage back to Mile Post 777, met with our Identification Section member, and went with him to the site of the body.When we arrived there, where our two recruits were standing back to back with their service revolvers drawn, standing on the big mound of overburden and gravel, all during the night, a band of wolves had howled from every direction to keep them awake and alert.At that latitude above the 60th parallel, you have the sun in the sky for the entire 24 hours, and the reason for the Yukon adopting “The land of the midnight sun.”

We stood back while the Ident member photographed the area and the body.From what I could see, the subject had been standing outside the front of the tent when he was shot in the front of his face with a very high-powered rifle, as there was blood and brain matter scattered around where the tent impression in the grass and weeds and none behind where the tent had been erected for some distance.The body had been carried over to the middle of the raspberry patch and dumped there, as there was a blood trail from the tent impression over to the body. 

No rifle cartridge was located anywhere in the area.We put the male subject in a body bag and into the back of the Identification Section station wagon, and he was going to convey it back to Whitehorse for the autopsy. We all went to the restaurant at Mile 777 for breakfast, and the recruits and I then drove back to Watson Lake, and the Ident member headed for Whitehorse with the body.The examination of the body and his wallet revealed his name, and he was known by the Alaska State Police and was one of the people they were seeking for the armed robbery.

The Sgt. had notified all of the Detachments up and down the Alaska Highway and requested roadblocks be established at all the points in an attempt to catch the culprit(s) before they got off the Alaska Highway,but they managed to make it back to their home, I believe South Dakota before they were arrested.I was not involved in that part of the investigation and a 57-year memory does not serve me that well when I had no personal reason to deal with those facts.

They were wanted by the Alaska State Police as well for an armed bank robbery at a bank in Anchorage.There were two brothers and a neighbor of theirs, and they got into an argument over the division of the money from the bank robbery and the older brother shot him and increased the percentages of their take.

They then hid the body, packed up, and headed out.When they were arrested, they had a .300 Weatherby magnum, so that was the rifle that blew their partner’s head off, as I had suggested, was responsible for the extent of the head injury.

Ironically, a lot of my good police work and things that saved my life were just bits of good fortune and timing that were on my side.I imagine the amount of searching that we would have had to do to search the endless number of borrow pits in just ten miles from the last known Highway mileage point for that body, in the hundreds of borrow pits.To be just traveling north, along the Highway, and have that Raven fly out of the borrow pit with a portion of the skull and fly along the roadway and drop it when I fired my service revolver instead of flying off into the trees with this unknown white object that was again a stroke of luck. 

To be at the right place, to have the radio communication work over that distance, was more than luck.It was a miracle as 20 miles was what we were normally used to havingworked in the Police car.We had single-sideband radios for long-distance networking but they had specially cut antennas set up to work bouncing the radio signal off the ionosphere.

That reminds me of when I was doing a search years later and had traveled several miles off, on the Arctic ice, searching for an overdue prospector/geologist.We went out of one river onto the arctic sea ice and had to go about ten miles out to avoid the huge broken ice chunks from the shore.Ice breakup when the tide came in and out, and we were going to go in, on the next river to the east, and search along the west side of theShaler mountains, which could have been visited by our missing prospector.It was time to do a radio check-in with Coppermine Detachment, we stopped and set out the antenna and began calling to report on what we planned.

We had a portable Single Side Band radio and had an antenna cut for the frequency.And worked out what I thought was my approximate longitude and latitude, set out the antenna on the ice, and called Coppermine, but I did not get any response on the radio.I tried Yellowknife and Inuvik and got no response.Then, asked if anyone was receiving this frequency, and I got a response asking for my 10-20 (location), and I gave him 69 degrees north and about 170 degrees west. And he said for me to stand.

In about five minutes, he came back, calling my radio designation, and I answered him, and the next thing he said,Are you shitting me and are out on the Arctic Ocean?”I confirmed that I believed I was about 10 miles from shore north of Victoria Island, in the Northwest Territories, and wanted to know what his 10-20 was, and he told me Victoria, B.C.We chatted for a bit, and then the signal broke up.I was able to contact Coppermine to advise that we were unable to find the overdue prospector and were intent on breaking camp and heading back to Holman Island tomorrow.

At this latitude, the sun goes below the horizon about the 10th of October and does not come above the horizon until about the 15thof January, so for about four months, you are dealing with sort of a twilight zone where the only time it is really dark,when it is heavy clouds and with the semi-light of the Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights) you can make your way around without the aid of a flashlight.The lights of the skidoo were a great help in identifying the trail ahead and any marks on the ground.

We saw quite a few herds of the white Perry Island caribou and a lot of rabbits, and my guide was able to shoot a white wolf on this trip because they are so unfamiliar with any habitation that they do not run away but sort of stand their ground until you are within a couple of hundred feet before taking any evasive action.The Muskoxen just formed their defensive circle with their calves in the center, and you went around them, and they did not move and made offensive grunting noises.

We unfortunately did not see any Polar bears on that trip, but we did see tracks around, where it had killed a couple of caribou in different parts of our search.

 

Pipeline Break-Up TheCanol Road



When I was stationed at Watson Lake, one of the trappers reported a leak in the pipeline up the Canol Road. This pipeline was built by the American Army to provide fuel in the event of a Japanese attack on Alaska and the Northern Pacific coastal area. It was completed, and fuel was being refined and shipped, even over the wishes of a rather reluctant Canadian Government, between 1942 and 1944. The crude oil from Norman Wells in the Northwest Territories was transported to Whitehorse in the Yukon Territory for refining. It was intended to provide fuel for the war, as they feared the Japanese after their landings on some of the islands down from the Alaska panhandle.

The crude oil from the Norman Wells oil fields had such a high octane rating that it would flow through the pipeline at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit, even though the six-inch pipeline was not buried but just welded together and left on the surface. All of the six-inch pipe went from Edmonton on the railroad to Hay River and then by barge from Hay River across Great Slave Lake to the Mackenzie River down to Norman Wells. The construction crew built the Canol Road to haul the pipe, starting at Norman Wells and going to Whitehorse, where they built a refinery that could produce 3,000 barrels per day to ensure a secure fuel supply for the anticipated war effort in the northwest.

After the Alaska Highway was built, and they were anticipating having to fight the Japanese in Alaska, they were preparing to supply fuel for the military effort. The pipeline was a fiasco, costing over five times its $24 million estimate and plagued by shoddy workmanship. Its deficiencies, exposed by a United States Senate committee chaired by Harry Truman, embarrassed the American military. When the pipeline was abandoned in March 1945 after only 13 months of operation, it left a festering scar across the Canadian Northwest, a "junkyard monument to military stupidity." They left all the pipelines in place when they shut down the refinery and sold the refinery.

I had a double-tracked Ski-Doo, and the sergeant sent me up to see how extensive the leak was. I took the trapper with me and hauled some of his supplies to his cabin in a valley just short of the leak. We had lunch and then went further along to where he indicated the leak was. There was a definite smell of petroleum chemicals in the air.

He was smoking at the time and threw down his butt. There was a big "Woof," and the snow started to burn all over the place around us. We made a quick about-face and made it to the top of the hill, stopped, and looked back. There was a black pall of smoke that was possibly 500 feet wide, and we were a good half mile away. We could feel the heat from the flames, and the black cloud of smoke went thousands of feet in the air.

We went back to his cabin, and after supper, we went back to the viewpoint. There was still black smoke and flames several hundred feet in the air. All the trees were just sticks along the burned-out area. You could still feel the heat from that black smoke incendiary, even though it was -20°F and we were a good half mile away.

I went back to Watson Lake and reported my findings. I returned about a week later and drove right down to where the leak was located. It was still burning, coming out of the pipe. The second break was right where he had thrown the cigarette down, and we had hastily retreated. The pipe was not buried, just lying on the top of the ground, but there were just flames, and no smoke was visible. The valley had to be a mile across, and the fuel had leaked out of the pipeline, obviously the lowest point in the valley as well as the crest of the valley.

I enjoyed reliving their adventures and experiences. It seemed that most of them had nicknames, and true names were not always known. I never stopped to figure out how many gallons of liquid a six-inch pipe would contain in a mile of pipe, but it sure created a lot of heat when it was burning and melted two feet of snow for half a mile in every direction. What was coming out of the pipe was a light brown liquid and must have been a petroleum product with a fairly high octane as the fumes caught fire from the trapper's discarded cigarette.

I found out later that the refinery was located in Whitehorse and this had been the feedstock for that refinery. The pipeline was a fiasco, costing over five times its $24 million estimate and plagued by shoddy workmanship. Its deficiencies, exposed by a United States Senate committee chaired by Harry Truman, embarrassed the American military. When the pipeline was abandoned in March 1945 after only 13 months of operation, it left a festering scar across the Canadian Northwest. The path for the pipeline was just a cat road, made as level as they could to be able to weld the 50-foot chunks of pipe together. There was no road grade made with a total distance of 407 miles (654 km) between Norman Wells and Whitehorse.

The Chilcoot Pass Trail

The Yukon Government put a pile of money into developing the Chilkoot Pass Trail even though most of it is in the Province of British Columbia,and it seems the American Government took it over because they were trying to handle it in Whitehorse. They even began to restrict the number of people being able to use it all year, and they have a fee, a pass system, and a fine if you are caught on their end without a pass.You have to check in with Customs and Immigration at Whitehorse or with the American Customs in Skagway if you are southbound.They had a band of prisoners who volunteered to work outside and worked at building bridges across some of the small creeks and leveling some of the trails, lived in tents, and enjoyed the outdoors.They had one guard that worked right along with the prisoners.I checked on them every six to ten days and transported the chaps that finished their time served back to Whitehorse and sometimes provided prisoners transportation to the work camp.

The Chilkoot Trail is only 3,245 feet above sea level, and Dyea and Skagway are at sea level.To get to the top of the initial climb, it is almost a 45-degree climb for 3miles, and they suggest you consider 3 to 5 days to complete the walk from Dyea to Lake Bennett.The climb from the steepest part ends about six miles along the trail, and this portion is barren rock and usually some snow patches, even in the early summer.Then, a gentle slope through alpine stretches with scrub trees, willows, and the number of narrow, deep lakes that the trail shoulders with gentle downward slopes until you reach the head of the trail around Lindeman Lake and back into spruce forests.

Lindeman Lake has a mile of a fairly fast bit of rock-strewn water with heavy white horse rapids that flow into the end of Bennett Lake. It is shallow with lots of big rocks and you cannot make it up with a canoe powered by an outboard motor.

When I was checking on the penal crew, they were working on building and improving the trail around the east side of Lindeman Lake, and I hiked that portion, the Chilkoot Pass Trail, many times in the summer of 1965.Before the trail was surveyed for summer access, another trail was made as there was a really dangerous area where the surface of the basalt had foot-wide cracks that were very randomly spaced, and the cracks were five or six feet deep.If you missed your footing placement or slipped, you could easily break a leg.I spent over a week up in that Alpine area near the border on another investigation, which is another story.

At the south end of Lindeman Lake was what they called the Lindeman City, and in that portion of the valley, where most of the trees were harvested to be whip-sawed into lumber to build all of the thousands of boats, barges, and rafts that the gold seekers made.

On the shore, back of the Northwest Mounted Police cabin, his huge church, partially erected from the scab lumber from the outside of the logs, was whipsawed into lumber. Our church builder would have to tie all of the slabs and haul them the length of the lake, let them go in the river to the end of Lindeman Lake, and catch them again at Bennet Lake, where he was building his church.

On May 29th, 1898,Eight hundred boats set out down at Bennett Lake, following the ice in the lake breakup and then past the Caribou Crossing, now named Carcross; past Windy Arm and into Taku Arm, down the Tagish River to Marsh Lake and finally into the Yukon River.

 They were the leading edge of a massive flotilla that would grow to over 7,000 boats holding 30,000 restless and hopeful stampeders.The North West Mounted Police assigned a number to each boat, carefully recording the names of the passengers to facilitate notification of next of kin.Such precautions were the result of authorities having no way to ensure proper identification of bodies retrieved after their boats had capsized.In the first days of the rush down the Yukon River, over 100 boats were torn to pieces in the White Horse Rapids, dragging at least ten to their deaths. Those who had survived with their lives lost most of their supplies and were trapped between the horrors of the Coast Mountain passes and the unknown world of the gold fields.

When the Yukon River began to thaw on late May 16, 1898. over 4,000 people were camped out along Lake Lindeman, and they broke camp and followed the ice down Bennet Lake past Carcross to the Taku Arm and then the Tagish River, across Marsh Lake to the beginning of Yukon River at this point, they had traveled some 275 km.From this point, they had to navigate the Hells Gate Canyon, followed by the "white horse rapids" right after the canyon.Then, about twenty miles of the Yukon River, then the length of Lake Lebarge, and back into the Yukon River system to the Klondike River at Dawson City.The distance from the Hells Gate Canyon to the Klondike River is some 533 km. It is no picnic down the Yukon as there are many rapids that are extremely dangerous;the five-finger rapids are only one of them;choosing the wrong channel was fraught with the fear of upset capsize or being swamped and possibly drowning.

The N.W, M.P had the Fraser Customs post about ten miles higher up (possibly 10 miles) from Lindeman City, and they too hauled the slabs up to heat their building by dogsled, as it is located in barren rock country, which is located in British Columbia at the American border.They collected customs and logged every gold seeker in and weighed their perishables and food to ensure they had at least 2000 pounds of food to sustain them for two winters, as there were no facilities ahead of them, where they could replenish any food stocks. To prevent mass starvation in the remote and inaccessible Yukon Territory, the Canadian government required every stamper to bring a year's supply of goods to customs.It is estimated they had walked 4,000 km carrying 50 - 70 pound loads and returning empty for the remainder of their supplies, and at this point, they were only halfway across the Chilkoot Trail to Bennett.Most of the gold seekers took three months to haul everything they owned from Dyea to Lake Bennett.

I found a list of goods suggested by The Northern Pacific Railroad Company published in the Chicago Record's Book for Gold Seekers in 1897 and included the following list of supplies.

150 lbs. bacon		8 lbs. baking powder

2 lbs. soda			125 lbs. beans

1/2 lb. evaporated vinegar		10 lbs. tea

12 oz. compressed soup		10 lbs. coffee

1 can mustard		25 lbs. sugar 		

1 tin matches (for four men)	25 lbs. dried potatoes

Stove for four men	2 lbs. dried onions

Gold pan for every		400 lbs. flour

Set of granite buckets 		25 lbs. rolled oats	

Large bucket			1 lb. pepper	

Knife, fork, spoon, cup, and plate75 lbs. dried fruits

Frying pan15 lbs. salt 		Coffee and teapot

1/2 dozen heavy wool mittens	1 heavy rubber-lined coat

2 heavy over shirts1 dozen heavy wool socks

2 pairs heavy snag-proof rubber boots	2 pairs shoes 	

8 lbs. of pitch and 5 lbs. of oakum for four men,Nails, five lbs. each of 6,8,10 and 12 penny,four-man Tent, 10 x 12 feet for four men

8 lbs. of pitch and 5 lbs. of oakum for four men,Nails, five lbs. each of 6,8,10 and 12 penny, four-man Tent, 10 x 12 feet for four men 

4 pairs blankets (for two men)2 pairs overalls

1 suit of oil clothing		4 towels

Several changes in summer clothing

A small assortment of medicines

I believe I have it all correct, as I have completed the Chilkoot Trail three times. It seems I’ve read everything ever written about the Klondike, and I’ve experienced the places mentioned in most of the books and articles. I’ve even read letters sent home by those who lived through and experienced the hardships of that era. When I was stationed in Dawson City, I had the pleasure of meeting some of the original gold seekers who were living in the Dawson Senior’s Residence, as well as a few who were still working their claims on the creeks.

One of our duties was to periodically visit and check up on these miners. We had a record of who was on each of the many creeks and those who came into Dawson for the winter. A great number of them occupied the Senior’s Residence, and I often spent my free time listening to their tales and adventures, usually with a bit of rum to loosen the memories. I have a few good stories associated with some of those old miners that are certainly worth recalling.

There were three English nurses at the hospital in Dawson City, and they were always eager to listen to the stories told by the men in the senior residence. The head nurse, however, forbade me from bringing any alcohol into the residence. But the nurses’ kit bags were never checked, so they would sneak in bottles of beer. We would pour it very slowly into the miners’ big coffee cups and sit down to listen to their life stories.

The nurses would make notes and send letters back home to their families, sharing the miners' tales. Throughout most of the winter, depending on how many people were in the hospital and the nurses' shift schedules, we visited the Senior’s Residence a couple of times a week. Some of the miners had prepared notes with dates, names, and details of the events they had lived through. They would often correct each other on who was involved in certain happenings, making the stories more accurate with each telling. They enjoyed reliving their adventures and experiences, though most of them had nicknames, and true names were not always known.

Pentecostal Fishing Trip Up The West Arm Of Bennet Lake

I had a 35 HP Johnson outboard motor on my own boat that I had built when I was in St. John’s, andI trailered it completely across Canada and up to Dawson City and then down to Carcross.I tried the 35 HP on their26-foot freighter canoe,whichwas the Police boat.It went so fast on flat water that the canoe was right out of the water literally.I only tried it once and did about five rotations before I was able to shut down the throttle.The air got under the boat, and only part of the skeg and prop were in the water.I was really proud ofhow fast I was going as there was no water resistance on the hull of the boat, and obviously, the prop was taking bigger bites out of the water and became more efficient with the faster speed.I had to turn slightly with the slight wind drift on the side of the boat, and when I adjusted it slightly, the trust of the motor was going off the longitudinal mass of the boat, and we passed where the front of the boat had been.I was holding onto the seat and right close to the center of mass of the o/b motor in the rotations.Ihad several rescue missions and trips in really big waves with the two 18 hp engines on that freighter canoe because when there arereally high winds, the waves get higher, but the distance between the crests isfurther apart.So you would have both engines running, one in neutral and locked down and the other running for going alongside the shoulder of the waves, and if you went over the crest of the wave, then you put the second motor in reverse so that the prow of the canoe did not go into the wave ahead and take on water.

You could have one motor locked down (so it would not tilt when in reverse), and if you were going right downwind, you had the locked down motor in reverse and adjusting the throttle so it could slow you down enough, and you could reverse the locked down motor and prevent taking on a massive amount of water with the bow of the boat stuck in the wave ahead.With going across the wave pattern, you could get in the trough of the wave on the back side of the slope, and you were really out of the wind and adjust the throttles to steer the boat without changing the angle of the motors. The only water you took on was the spray from the crest of the wave.The nice thing about having the second motor is that you have an instant backup if one fails, and you have two tanks of fuel with you at all times.I have taken both the engines running up to about a little more than half throttle, and you are going fast enough with still some boat in the water. Those big freighter canoes have to be the safest watercraft because you can walk along the gunnel in safety, and it will haul a couple tons of supplies if you want to load it down.

I have a story to relate from a trip toBennett Lake.We had a Pentecostal Minister whowas doing his best to convertthe local Natives all about his religion.He was married, and they had just had an addition to the family a couple months prior, and the Grandparents came from Illinois to see their little offspring.The Minister asked if he could borrow my pleasure boat to take his parents down Bennett Lake and up the West Arm for a fishing trip and afternoon picnic.I agreed to loan him the boat because the lake was dead flat, and it was only about a 15-mile trip. 

 The fishing gear was in the boat, and I advised him where the big ones were mostly to hide where there was a stream coming from between two mountains, and it disappearedbefore it madethe lake and its underground steam that the big ones feed on the smaller fish working in the underground current.They loaded up some food and I watched them go down Bennett Lake towards the west arm of the lake.

About noon, it really started to blow with a vengeance. When I met the train that was pulling in from Skagway, the engineer reported that there was an oil slick on Bennett Lake up about the West Arm entrance.It was not the information that I wanted to hear.

I packed a tent, camping gear, rifle, and grub, as well as rain gear because I had no idea what I was to encounter or how long I would be involved in the search for my Pentecostal Minister and his family.Going straight into the wind was not a problem other than a pretty rough ride and getting wet from the spray off the top of the waves. And the crash of the boat in the next wave.I had to angle just slightly and went alongside the railroad side of the lake. Iencountered the oil slick as described by the train engineer and followed it only to find it was a barrel of diesel in the water at the side of the railroad tracks that had rusted out and leaking what was left in the barrel.

But I still had a mission to find my preacher buddy and his family and my boat.By this time, I was past Windy Arm, and I just turned out into the big waves and caught a trough and headed across Bennet Lake, and the waves took me right into the West Arm and a lot calmer water along the south shore of West Arm because of the high mountain range on along that side of the lakeI travelled all the way to the west end in relatively calm water.The West Arm of the lake (about 16 km long (10 mi), and Millshaven Bay, off the West Arm, bring Lake Bennett's total shoreline to about 160 km (100 miles).Coming back along the north shore was a bit choppy. Lo and behold, my boat was pulled up on shore with the engine off at my favorite fishing spot.

The family wasback in the trees and out of some of the wind and in the process of increasing their exposure to the wind with some sloped branches and some blankets over the branches to provide protection for the baby from the wind.It just started to rain, so I got the tent out of the boat, and we put it up and had the men help me haul the big canoe mostly out of the water stern first.We set up the tent, got the Coleman stove going, and made a pot of coffee as well as tea and a couple of infrared heaters, and they were very comfortable in a matter of fifteen minutes. Other than the roar of the wind in the trees above, it was a nice camping experience for them. I told them that I would not be able to take everyone safely in the freighter canoe and that my boat would not handle the waves and wind out in Bennett Lake, but I assured them when it blew this hard, it did not blow for long, and I would come back when the wind dropped and pick them up and help put my boat back in the water and hook it up again.I told them that I had to go back as I had advised Whitehorse that I was going out on this search and had to get back to tell them that everyone was alive and well, and I got paid to Police Carcross, no picnic in the West Arm of Bennett Lake.

Then began the discussion of their duties to bring the word of God to their devoted churchgoers, and they had to be there for the morning service.I agreed to take the preacher, and then he wanted to take his father to show him how well he conducted the service and brought the message to his parishioners.With their minds made up that they were coming with me, my concern turned to the protection of the two ladies and the baby left alone in the wilds of the Yukon.She indicated that she hunted with her brother back in Illinois, and it was squirrels,rabbits, racoons, and groundhogs, and she used a .22 rifle when she hunted with him.I asked if she had ever fired any rifle other than the .22 rifle, and she said she had shot a .410 shotgun once.

I was intent on leaving her my .264 Winchester Magnum for protection from grizzlies, black bears, and wolves that were common in that vicinity.I had done some work the week earlier with the Yukon Fish and Game member and flew a super cub in the mountains within 8 - 10 miles of their location, and we saw eleven grizzlies, some with cubs up at elevations hunting marmots.I decided to familiarize her with my rifleand how to load it and asked if she would like to try shooting it to gain confidence that she could use it if she needed to.There was a blown-down tree floating out about150 yards offshore, and I had her lean the gun over a log and try to hit right at the waterline near the roots hanging out of the water.She shot, and there was a huge spray of water where I had told her to aim, and she was distracted enough to have hit where she aimed that she was not aware of the recoil she had absorbed.

I left them with all of my food, and they had caught several fish, so they were well set up for food.We got the big canoe back in the water and thenlay directly in the bottom of the boattowards the bow of the boat and covered it with a tarp so they would not get too wet. They waved goodbye, and we headed for Bennett Lake and some big waves.There was an ever-increasing height of waves as we wentout into crossing the open area of Millshaven Bay, but we were able to ride the back of several troughs for a couple miles and soon hit Bennett Lake in all of its furry.We were in the calm atthe bottom of a trough, and they decided to see what was going on and threw back the side of the tarp and both of them looked out, and there was a wall of water, possibly 10 feet on each side, and I suppose it looked higher as they were laying in the bottom of the boat and the right top of the wave was a white froth from the wind. They pulled the tarp back over them, and I was taken up trying to adjust the motors to climb the back shoulder of the wave. 

Then,all of a sudden, I thought we were in real trouble because both engines started making this strange sound.When I slid down into the bottom of the trough this strange sound was the both of them praying at the top of what their vocal cords could produce.This strange sound continued until we pulled into the shelter of Caribou River and under the railroad Bridge right in Carcross.

Overnight, the storm blew itself out, and we returned in the morning after the church service and picked up my boat and the family.They came back together, and I went on to Bennet for Lunch and a check-in with prisoners doing trail enhancement leading to the Chilkoot Pass, and returned to Carcross to find that I had to drive to Tagish on a complaint.

 

 

 

 

Search For The Swiss Mountain Climbers On The Nahanni River



In the early summer, I took the information from four Swiss Mountain climbers who had intended to climb several mountains in the area north and east of the Cantung Mine, more than 300 Miles from Watson Lake.They had made arrangements with the local taxi to take them and their equipment to the area and had an inflatable canoe, that they would navigate the Black River and stop off at the mountains. They thought it had never been climbed.Then, they would go down the Nahanni River to check in at Fort Simpson on the 25th of August.They had arrangements to fly to Yellowknife and then to Edmonton and back home from there to Switzerland.They had permits from the Yukon and the Northwest Territories government.I went with them to where they were camped, near the “Sign Post” park, and they intended to put up Swiss flags to show that they had climbed that mountain.They all had florescent orange jackets on with the Swiss flag sewn on the breast pocket, and I took some pictures with their cameras at the signposts area.

I had attended the Mountain Rescue course in Banff, and I was the coordinator for the Yukon and had been involved in three mountain climbing rescues on Mount Logan, as it is the tallest mountain in Canada at 19,551 feet high and It is in the St. Elias Range of mountains in the southwestern part of the Yukon.It is located only 75 miles off the Gulf of Alaska and there are no weather stations in the area, and it is subjected to extreme snowfalls of three feet of snow in 24 hours.All of those rescues were a matter of hiring a helicopter and locating the overdue climbers and then being dropped off, while the helicopter ferried them to a lower elevation, where there was no snow or out to their vehicles on the Alaska Highway.

They did not have any topographic maps, and they only had road maps of the Yukon and Northwest Territories, so their knowledge of the rivers wasvery limited.One of the group brothers had been working at the Cantung Mine, and when he was back home in Switzerland, he had shown them pictures of the mountains in that area, and he had climbed the first two mountains northeast of the Cantung Mine.I had flown over the route they were planning on taking, and I warned them about the Virginia Falls on the Nahanni River and told them of a Water Resources cabin, about half a mile up from the cable car set up on the river just below it, where the Water Resources personnel used to measure the 75-foot difference in the height of the water from spring to fall.I figured that the height of the water at this time of year would not bemuch of a concern, but I warned them that they would have to portage around Virginia Falls on the south side of the river, which is just upriver from cable car setup near the water resources cabin.

They spoke good English, and I thought that I had warned them sufficiently, although I did not have any pictures to show them of the size and volume of water that flowed over the falls.I indicated to them that the portage is almost two miles above the falls and on the south side of the river, and there is no access back into the river for six or seven miles on the north side of the river and encouraged them to sign in at the Water Resources cabin so that we would be able to know that they made it that far.

I have since learned that Virginia Falls has an average volume of 1,000 cubic meters per second (35,000 cubic feet). It is twice the height of Niagara Falls at 315 feet with a width of 850 feet, besides having secondary falls on the North side of the major falls. That is more restricted with basalt rock inhibiting the free drop that same height as the main falls.This was followed by several sharp twists and turns of a very narrow and at one place, where the river runs directly into a rock face that is at least 4,000 feet of vertical basalt rock in the next two to three miles of this canyon.

I had the file open, and the diary date came up on the 25th of August.I contacted Fort Simpson, and the Swiss climbers had not arrived.

They said their usual Night Guard had just returned from a holiday prospecting trip above the Virginia Falls, and he was west from the area of where the Black River dumps into the Nahanni, and he had not met anyone on the Nahanni River.

There is a smaller portion of the falls that cascades down a basalt rocky area, about a third the size of the actual falls, with a major pool at the base. We made plans that I would search the mountains east of the Black River, as they had planned to climb several mountains in that area. They could make their way up the Nahanni River to see if they could locate any sign of them on or near the river. They would have three days until I finished checking the mountain climbing area, after which we would begin a physical search of the river. In case they got into trouble during their mountain climbing, we would have the other end of the search covered.

I drove into the mine at Cantung, waded across the Black River, and climbed the third mountain on the east side. I located the Swiss flag and, with binoculars, I could make out the red flag with a white cross on the top of a mountain to the north, though clouds prevented me from seeing the top of the third mountain. I had my camp in a pack sack and hiked the ten miles, mostly on the gravel bars on the side of the river, as the main flow was further down. My topographic map indicated the best route was up a steep slope on the northeast side, which saved me from near-vertical faces on the river side of the mountain and another eight- or nine-mile hike. I reached the top and located the flag almost directly above the river. With the binoculars, I could see where their camp had left an impression and noticed some cut spruce trees in the area. Looking north, I spotted the fourth flag on the next mountain, so they had safely climbed their four mountains. From there, the Black River would have been a gentle paddle down to the Nahanni River.

I crossed the river and hiked onto a cat road that led between Cantung Mine and the second tungsten mine at Mantung, making good time walking the thirty-some miles back to my police car at Cantung. I had a good meal at their mess and drove the 300 miles back to Watson Lake. The sergeant suggested we charter an aircraft and fly into the Water Resources cabin on the Nahanni River to ensure they had made it that far. If so, they would be in the Fort Simpson detachment area because, more than likely, they hadn’t taken my advice and had tried to go over Victoria Falls in their canoe.

 

I went to the airport to check on the availability of an aircraft, and the owner said a new pilot was coming in on a flight from Vancouver with 3,000 hours of float time. He thought it would be a good trip for the new pilot since I knew the country and was a pilot myself, making it a good introduction to flying in the North. The aircraft was fueled, and the Canadian Pacific flight arrived. The new pilot was introduced to the aircraft, and I loaded my survival gear. I made a phone call to the detachment, and we headed for Cantung Mine, basically following the dust line on the road below. We turned north into the Black River valley and soon east when we reached the Nahanni River.

When I first saw the cable stretching across the river, I told him we could land as the cabin I wanted to check was on a hill in the trees, with a small indent in the river and a beach in front. He landed quickly, going downstream, which was a bit different from what I had learned when I got my float endorsement. There were no clear signs of wind direction. When he turned into the river current, which was easily nine knots, we were directly across from the cabin. Each time he tried to turn toward the cabin, the strong current would catch the side of the floats, sending us downstream. He had to power up and turn back to where the cabin was located. Each time he tried, the plane would swing completely around and head towards the falls and the cable that stretched across the river with a suspended case on the north bank. After the fourth attempt, I asked if he minded if I gave it a try, telling him I had my float endorsement and had landed on rivers before, though never in a current this strong. He agreed, so I took over, staying close to the riverbank where I knew there was enough water from the sloping basalt. I powered into the little bay, shut down the engine, and coasted gently onto the sandy beach.

I went up to the cabin and checked the book on the cabinet. All four had signed in, leaving their addresses and phone numbers in Switzerland, which I copied into my notebook. I returned to the aircraft and suggested the pilot sign the book as well. He did, and when he got back, we pushed the aircraft off the beach. He started the engine, and we continued upriver. From the cabin to the falls, the shore on both sides of the river was steep, angled basalt rock, making it impossible to exit the river. Four people in an inflatable canoe couldn't paddle against that current to return to the portage point on the south bank of the river. It was most likely they had gone over the falls and drowned, as there was no way they could have escaped the river given the slippery, angled rock sides.

We pulled into the current, and he conducted his engine checks before powering upriver without beginning a takeoff run. As we rounded the first bend, I grew concerned about his intentions. He then turned and applied full power, attempting a takeoff going downstream, which was a definite mistake. The floats are designed with a step—about a foot rise for the flattened rear—so that only half of the pontoons break the suction with the water at a certain speed, reducing the takeoff run. We were nearly on the step when the river’s turn approached, causing the floats to reenter the water. He continued to rock the plane back and forth, trying to regain the step, and we were nearing the cable crossing. Just as we approached the cabin again, the plane finally lifted off. However, we had no choice but to fly under the cables since the riverbanks rose 500 feet above us, with the north side formed by 6,000 feet of solid rock extending skyward, snow still on the peaks.

We flew under the cables on the left side of the river, then over the falls, losing altitude in the downdraft. I told him I was taking over as we were nearing the canyon. With no room to make turns or gain altitude, we were committed to navigating the narrow canyon. Each turn cost us precious distance from the boiling waters below. At one point, we were within 75 feet of the rock face. If the engine faltered, we would crash. My pilot, a Catholic, kept crossing himself and muttering prayers, and the smell in the cockpit made it clear his nerves had gotten the better of him.

We finally made it to a gentler stretch of the river and gained some altitude. During one of the steep turns, I caught a glimpse of a red canoe among the debris of broken trees on the south shore. After we reached altitude, I offered him control, but he refused, saying I had saved our lives so far and he had no idea what heading to take. He admitted he had had enough of northern flying. I asked where he got his float time, and he said most of it was between Vancouver Harbour and various harbours on Vancouver Island, with some trips to Prince Rupert and salmon fishing camps. He had never landed in a river, and dealing with currents like this was entirely new to him. He had taken on an eight- to ten-knot current without knowing how to handle it.

We landed back in Watson Lake and pulled up to the dock. The airline owner commented on how smoothly the landing had gone, and the pilot told him I had saved our lives. He then announced he was returning to Vancouver and was done with northern flying. I went to the detachment and spoke with the Fort Simpson members. I told them that the group had signed in at the cabin and that I had spotted the red canoe among the debris about two miles below the falls. I doubted it would be visible from the river, as the water level had dropped dramatically, and both shores were covered with broken trees. It would be challenging to find the bodies without walking both sides of the river due to the numerous bends and the amount of debris. They informed me they had already recovered one body on their way to the falls, identifiable by the Swiss flag sewn on the jacket and the personal ID found in his wallet. They were working on notifying the next of kin. I passed along the contact information from the cabin logbook, which included phone numbers and addresses.

The police plane was coming to pick up the body and transport it to Whitehorse for shipment back to Switzerland. They invited me to assist in searching for the remaining three individuals, with one person running the boat and two searching the riverbanks. I agreed and caught the police aircraft to help. I packed my tent and a few supplies, and by evening, I was standing on a sandbar on the Nahanni River, about ten miles below Virginia Falls, waiting for the Fort Simpson members to arrive.

The next day, we located the inflatable canoe and some gear, and we found a second body about a quarter-mile upstream. On the third day, we switched sides of the river. The man running the boat was jumping over logs on the other side when I found the third body half-buried in the sand alongside a large log. We decided to terminate the search, suspecting the fourth body had likely remained in the river or was now north in the Mackenzie River. Alternatively, it could have been buried in the sand along the 150 miles of Nahanni River between the falls and Fort Simpson, as the river had dropped 50 feet from its high water mark. We set up camp and waited for the police plane to return. We piled and inventoried their gear for recovery and shipped it back with the bodies, sending the inflatable canoe to the Swiss climbing group that had hired me to locate them. I had completed my work as an observer for the group, returning their inflatable boat, and I kept their thanks and acknowledgment that I had fulfilled my contract.

 







 

Fort McPherson Grave Site Maintenance

 

I was stationed at Fort McPherson, N.W.T from September 1st, 1967, for two years, and one of our duties was refurbish the grave sites and cairns of ex-members that died in our whole Detachment area.I had my own aircraft at the time, and I took one of the local natives whohad been involved in the search for the Mad Trapper.I flew the Rat River area, and he pointed out the location where Cst. Edgard Millen was shot by the Mad Trapper.It would appear thatMillen had figured out that the "mad trapper" had been walking with his snowshoes on backward and was tracking him. The mad trapper had made his way up a steep slope. 

 

 

At the side of the valley and was hiding at the edge, watching the confusion of trails that he had left.When Millen poked his head up over the bank, the mad trapper who washiding in the snow at the top and shot him dead.

There had been a crude assembly of short logs to mark the site.I came back home and carved and painted a sign that was four feet square.I went by riverboat up the Rat River and hauled in my sign and more paint into the site from the Rat River.I made a four-sided square of descending logs out of local six-inch spruce.I had peeled the bark off them,spiked them together, and painted them white.This cairn was about ten feet across at the base and seven feet high with diminishing lengths.I then nailed the sign that I had made that was facing south so it could be seen from the valley.I know I have a picture of the cairn in my endless number of albums.I have also visited the Park, which is named after him, and a monument in Edmonton next to where the Northlands race track used to be. 

While at Fort McPherson, a writer came over from Whitehorse, and he stayed at my residence while I located all of the locals whowere involved in the Mad Trapper incident.I arranged translators for some of them to sit in the interviews and take them to where they were at fish camps in the Mackenzie delta.He sent me a book that he wrote for my efforts.

I did the cairns on the "Lost Patrol" when five members froze to death.While at Fort McPherson.They were buried in Fort McPherson, but I built cairns where they had died.Sgt. Dempster had made the mail route from Dawson city in record time, and Inspector Fitzgerald decided he would beat his record and obviously took less dog food and less food for the five men.

Inspector Fitzgerald made it back to within about five miles of Fort McPherson before he died of the extreme cold. They got lost, and the temperature went to -70to -80 F, and they ran out of food and ate their dogs and harnesses, and slowly, each of them froze to death trying to make their way back to Fort McPherson.

I was at Dawson City in 1965, and myself and a serving prisoner, refurbished the entire graveyard. It was my first investigation of hit and run and impaired driving when I got to Dawson City in August 1964. The traveling Judge sentenced him to six months to be served at the RCMP Detachment in Dawson City.We had a night guard, and I entertained Henry during the day.I made all new headboards by routering out their names and date of death for the graves, painted them white with black lettering, hauled different coloured gravel, and put up a low chain-link fence with black metal posts around the entire cemetery, and I built a big overhead sign for the entrance complete with painted crest.

While stationed at Carcross, I refurbished and made new headboards for two members whodrowned at Tagish. They had been fishing for dog food, and the canoe upset and they got tangled in the net and drowned.I just got back to the office, and correspondence from Ottawa ordered that they be dug up and transferred to the great-looking cemetery in Dawson City.That was accomplished, and I am sure that prisoners dug the graves because we were down seven feet before we hit the caskets.I built small caskets to accommodate their remains, which were "Buffalo Expressed" to Dawson and buried there.

While at Coppermine in 1970, I refurbished the cairn and built a headboard for the member that was buried over at Tree River, about a 150-mile boat ride east of Coppermine (now Kugluktuk). 



 

 

RCMPVA Vancouver Division posted: "Constable Edgar Millen – Reg # 9669 - RCMP Honour Roll # 51 Recently I submitted an article to our Vancouver Division web site on the recollections of members involved in the attempted arrest and search for Albert Johnson, always to be known as “The Mad Trapper."



 

New post on RCMP Veterans’ Association - Vancouver Division	 

 

	The Mad Trapper Part IIby RCMPVA Vancouver Division


Constable Edgar Millen – Reg # 9669 - RCMP Honour Roll # 51

Recently, I submitted an article to our Vancouver Division web site on the recollections of members involved in the attempted arrest and search for Albert Johnson, always to be known as “The Mad Trapper of Rat River.” See:

http://www.rcmpveteransvancouver.com/the-mad-trapper-of-rat-river/.The attempted arrest of Johnson resulted in the death of RCMP member Edgar Millen.

I have always said it is amazing to me how telling the story of one member or event in the history of the Force connects you to other stories. Eighty-eight years after the death of Edgar Millen, as a result of the above article, I have been connected to one of Edgar Millen’s relatives.

My friend, retired Superintendent Al Bunn, (ret’d), Reg # 22180/O.1436, upon reading the article, contacted me and informed me that he had a friend who was a relative of Edgar Millen and is in possession of photographs of Millen. Al suggested it might be worthwhile to contact him, which I did. Dots begin to connect!

Keith Briggeman’s grandfather was Edgar Millen’s brother. Being the only male grandchild, he was tasked with the safekeeping of Edgar’s possessions.

Keith retired after 34 years with BP Canada Energy Company and heritage companies. His formal education is finance where he worked prior to becoming the Manager, Corporate Security for BP Canada as well as the Manager, Corporate Security for BP America mid-west assets. Although he was never in law enforcement, he spent a great deal of time working with Calgary Police, Edmonton Police, and R.C.M.P., mostly out of “K” Division as well as various State Police Agencies and, on occasion, the F.B.I.

Keith has been kind enough to share his connection to Edgar Millen and provided photographs for us to enjoy and visualize life as a Mounted Policeman in the early 1900s and northern living. Read on!

RCMPVA Vancouver Division | September 6, 2020 at 8:44 PM | URL: https://wp.me/p2g73e-9JW




 

Unsubscribe to no longer receive posts from RCMP Veterans’ Association - Vancouver Division.

Change your email settings at Manage Subscriptions. 

Trouble clicking? Copy and paste this URL into your browser:

http://www.rcmpveteransvancouver.com/the-mad-trapper-part-ii/




 









 

Making a difficult arrest



I had made a trip up the Peel River to visit and check on some of the people who had a fishing camp about fifty miles south of Fort McPherson. There were four families with their tents set up and lots of racks of fish being dried over smoky willow fires. I recognized most of them and had lunch of fish soup with them, but there was one very big male I did not recognize. I introduced myself, and he gave me his name, which I felt was more of an Eskimo name because of the sharp syllables. Everyone appeared to be in good health as they sat around in the smoke, driven there by the profusion of mosquitoes. I was dressed in coveralls over my uniform, with gloves, the sleeves taped, and a hat with mosquito netting taped at the neck.

After spending an hour with them, I headed further south up the river. When the river turned west, I knew I had reached the edge of our Detachment area, and from there, it would be going into the Yukon. At that point, I turned around and headed back for Fort McPherson. As I passed the fishing encampment, all the men were in their boats attending to their nets, and the big native waved at me from the riverside as he was not working the nets.

When I got back to Fort McPherson, the Corporal advised me that he had received a message from Aklavik. They were looking for an Eskimo who had committed a very grievous assault on a woman, and they had been unable to locate him in or near their settlement. Inuvik had also been unable to find him. I contacted the members on the Single Side Band Radio and got his name and description. From their description, there was no doubt that he was the chap I saw at the fish camp. He matched the details they had given, and there were not too many very large Eskimos.

Early the next morning, I fueled up the boat, packed a lunch, and made arrangements with the Corporal to keep an eye out for me coming down the river. I planned to land on the sandbar to avoid turning in the current, as there was no place to land other than the dock. He was to bring the Jeep down to the sandbar because, according to the members, the man had a history of violence even when sober.

I headed south up the Peel River in the 26-foot freighter canoe, with two 18-horsepower outboard motors attached—one powering the boat and the second one tilted up as my standby motor. Three hours later, I arrived at the fish camp to find him still sleeping in his own tent. I explained to the locals that I was arresting him and would be taking him back to Fort McPherson. I asked them if they would help pack up his camp and load everything into his boat, which they did willingly.

I tied the boats together with slipknots so I could pull the rope and release them if necessary. I put his fuel tank in my boat, ensuring that by pressing the clip on the fuel line, his boat’s motor couldn’t run. With both motors running full tilt, we made good time going with the current.

The river is about a mile wide and fairly straight for a couple of miles to the south. As we approached the settlement, I used my binoculars and saw the Police Jeep leaving the lookout at the south end of the settlement. I began angling across the current, aiming to land on the side of the sandbar where the Jeep could drive freely to the water’s edge instead of attempting a sharp turn downstream into the dredged channel behind the sandbar and up to the dock.

As I began to angle across the current, he turned his outboard motor in the opposite direction. Instead of pulling the rope to disconnect the boats, I put the second motor down and started it. In no time, we were heading for the sandbar at a great speed. I reached down and disconnected his fuel line, causing his motor to quit. We were no more than 100 feet from shore, traveling quickly with my two motors running. I then unclipped both fuel tanks, and the motors stopped.

At that moment, we hit the sandbar going about 30 miles an hour. He stood up, and I jumped into the air to avoid the three sets of thwarts that stretched from beam to beam in the boat. The boats came to a stop, and I hit the sandbar, rolling several times. He also rolled over his camping equipment and landed face-first on the sand, skidding to a halt.

He picked up a large "beaver chew stick," approximately five inches in diameter and about nine feet long, and charged at me. I dodged the first swing and backed away, looking for something to defend myself with. After four or five more jabs from him, I found a stick about three inches in diameter and seven feet long.

With it, I was able to block and deflect his swings. I gave him a solid poke in the ribs when he was winding up for another strike. I blocked a swing and landed a heavy blow on his hand, which caused my stick to hit the side of his head. At that moment, an RCMP Police Otter plane flew overhead, preparing to land. His attention shifted to the aircraft, and I took the opportunity to poke him in the belly, knocking him to the ground. I followed up with several blows to his back, and he didn’t get up with his stick again.

By that time, the police plane had taxied up, and he stopped his attack. I tackled him, got him on the ground, and began to handcuff him just as the officers from the plane approached us.

About five minutes later, the Jeep arrived on the scene. I was upset and said, "I thought we agreed you’d meet me on the sandbar when I arrived." He explained that another member had told him the Officer Commanding (O.C.) was coming on the plane, so he had to return to his residence to get into uniform.

The officers decided to fly the suspect over to Aklavik with our member escorting him and then return to pick up the O.C. The O.C. had recorded some footage of the incident, capturing several of the suspect’s swings with the big stick and my defensive actions as they made their approach to land. This would serve as evidence if the suspect pleaded “Not Guilty” to the charge of assaulting a police officer.

Sadly, the woman he had assaulted died from her injuries, and he was charged with manslaughter, ultimately receiving a six-year sentence.



 

Shell Oil tragedy with the drowning of five men in the Nodwell



Shell Oil had a camp, and all the fuel and supplies were taken as far south up the Peel River as the tug could push the barges loaded with their camp. They planned to do seismic work, searching for oil in the foothills of the Richardson Mountains on the west side of the Peel River. Another barge dropped off all the explosives, and I had the locals build a secure building on the west side of the Peel River, about a mile away from the settlement, to store the explosives. I visited the camp, where they had one drilling trailer and one listening trailer, which they moved with two Nodwells. They also hired a number of locals to clear the seismic lines.

A major storm hit south, extending into the Yukon. The Peel River flows almost straight south and then west into the Yukon for over 100 miles, coming within about 100 miles east of Dawson City and originating at Chapman Lake. The five crew members forded the river with the Nodwell in the morning. However, when they returned that night, they noticed that the river was in flood stage. They attempted to cross the river, but when they descended the bank, the Nodwell went straight down into an 18-foot hole that the current had carved into the gravel bed of the river. The current carried the vehicle several hundred feet before leaving it submerged on its side, facing upstream, with only six inches of the box on the back showing above the water.

I was informed of the incident and traveled upstream in our 26-foot freighter canoe with a 28 HP outboard motor. When I arrived at the camp, the other Nodwell had already taken soundings of the water level before attempting to cross half a mile upstream, successfully returning to camp. I had brought my scuba gear and checked the cab of the submerged Nodwell. Four crew members were still in the passenger area, but the fifth body was missing. We stretched a cable across the river, and I hooked it onto the upper corner of the deck. They pulled the vehicle upright onto its big wheels and dragged it to the east side of the river and up a ramp where they had hauled the camp trailers earlier. I had the crew bring the four body bags to the camp, and they returned to Fort McPherson with the bodies so they could be sent south on the next scheduled flight.

I stayed at the camp overnight, as there was no sense in attempting a dragging operation with the river running so high. By morning, the river had dropped by about two feet. I conducted a visual search up and down the river for about 30 miles but did not locate the missing body. I repeated the search for two more days as the river slowly returned to normal levels but with no luck. Eventually, I returned to Fort McPherson.

I then decided to search by air using my aircraft. On my second trip, I spotted the body in the willows. I had prepared long strips of seismic tape with small stones tied to the ends, and I flew over the sandbar, dropping the strips until some landed in the trees on the opposite side of the river and others near the willows where the body was located. Afterward, I returned to Fort McPherson and arranged for a Twin Otter on floats to assist with the recovery. We landed on the river and taxied to the shore. The body was a good 300 yards from where the aircraft beached. The pilot, who informed me that he was there to fly and not help with body recovery, stayed in the aircraft.

I rolled the body into the body bag and dragged it over to the side of the floats. The man was large, and I struggled to lift him onto the floats. The floats had metal bars with pipe steps leading up to the door. As I climbed up, the body slipped into the water. On my second attempt, I tied the rope to both sides of the first rung of the steps and under the body, but I should have tied it to the top rung. By pulling on the rope, I could have gotten the body up to the door. Instead, I tied one end of the rope to the top step and lifted the other end close to vertical, using my shoulder to help bear the weight. Step by step, I finally rolled the body onto the aircraft floor. I dragged it forward and strapped it down.

Since the pilot refused to help, I decided to open the rubber body bag zipper to get some fresh air, as I had gotten sick from the smell while rolling the body. Within a minute or two, the pilot had his head out the window, barfing. I zipped up the body bag, untied the aircraft, and pushed it back into the current. He dropped me off at Fort McPherson and flew on to Inuvik.

Shell Oil closed the camp, selling most of the perishables to the Hudson Bay and the Free Trader in Fort McPherson. They planned to remove the camp and vehicles during the next shipping season. They were concerned about the Environment Department's reaction to all the empty barrels and barrels of fuel, so they sold the fuel to me for a dollar. I went up, cut some long willow and small poplar trees, and with a roll of binder twine, I bundled the barrels and tied them to the trees. I guided them downriver in the current, pulled them into the dredged channel, and rolled them up onto the shore. I gave the empty 10-gallon barrels to the Hudson Bay.

I struck a deal with the local airline operator, allowing them to fuel up at Fort McPherson in exchange for dropping off an equivalent amount of fuel at different RCMP detachments up the MacKenzie River, as well as in Yellowknife. This arrangement provided me with fuel caches for my airplane at various points, like Aklavik and Inuvik. I swapped the helicopter fuel for several char fishing trips up the Rat River. On the first trip, two of us caught 200 pounds of char and were back in Fort McPherson in four hours. On the next trip, we took a larger helicopter with more fishermen and brought back 600 pounds of char. They also made several trips with fuel in 10-gallon drums over to Coppermine in exchange for the fuel used at Fort McPherson, making the cost of operating my aircraft very reasonable compared to paying $3.00 a gallon.

 

Learning Instrument Flight Rules the Hard Way



Instrument flight rules (IFR) does not mean “I follow roads, or I follow railroads.” It involves using the basic instruments in the aircraft, allowing you to fly in zero visibility and get to your destination, and land safely. I got my first real experience of paying attention to the instruments in my aircraft when I had no other choice. I had often taken on a nice fluffy cloud and flown through it. There was enough turbulence in the cloud that you had to work at keeping the aircraft on track, keeping it level, and not losing any altitude. You had the altimeter to give you the height above sea level, an attitude indicator (turn and bank) that helped if you kept the bubbles centered in turn for a balanced change of directions and a compass for the direction that you planned on heading. It was not planned, and I was left with no other choice if I wanted to keep living, stay alive, and save my airplane.

Most of my flying experiences up to that point were Visual Flight Rules (VFR), where you usually chose good weather, stayed away from cloud banks, kept a sharp eye out for other aircraft, and watched out for flights of geese, ducks, and other birds along the way to make sure that you did not invite them through the windshield for dinner.

They had closed the Arctic Red River Detachment, and we were given the responsibility to do the policing of the settlement from Fort McPherson. I had the option of taking the 26-foot freighter canoe with an 18 HP outboard on a 40-mile trip down the Peel River, a 60-mile trip against the current of the west channel of the Mackenzie River, and then ten miles up the Mackenzie River to where the Arctic Red River dumps into the Mackenzie River and where the settlement is located. When I finished my duties there, I had areturn trip to look forward to. My other option was to take my aircraft on a three-quarters-of-an-hour flight in a heated cabin to get there and then have a comfortable flight back. The other option was a seven-hour boat trip in the open boat for over a hundred and ten miles and the same return trip on top of my day doing police work in the settlement. The days never ended because of the 24 hours that the sun goes around in the sky in the summer. At some latitudes, it does not come up above the horizon for a month and, in some places, for four months.

That year, we had a lot of forest fires in the area south of Fort McPherson, and at times, the visibility was really heavy with smoke, depending on the wind direction. I took off from the sandbar at Fort McPherson, and on the trip over early in the morning, the visibility forward was somewhat restricted, but you could make out the lakes, the features of the trees, and the features on the ground with only short periods of smoke obstructing your view of the ground from about the 500-foot level. The bands of smoke that I encountered and the heavy bands of smoke I flew through did not concern me as they were not that heavy. I had no difficulty in finding the settlement and took note of the compass heading that brought me right over the settlement, as there was no wind component to affect my track. I turned upriver because the banks of Mackenzie and the Arctic Red River are about 600 feet high. There was no smoke in the valley, and the wind was coming up the slot of the Mackenzie River. I turned back into the valley, began my letdown into the valley, and landed on the sandbar in front of the settlement. I tied down the aircraft to a big log that was mostly buried in the sand and had big metal loops that some other aircraft had organized for that purpose.

Fort McPherson is located 71 miles southwest of Inuvik near the west side of the Mackenzie Delta and 40 miles up the Peel River on the east side of the river. The Mackenzie Delta is a meandering bunch of rivers and lakes with a west and east channel, with most of the water going into these channels. Arctic Red River is on the east side of the river and runs into the Mackenzie River just below the Mackenzie River Ramparts. Then, the Mackenzie River turns abruptly north for about 10 miles before it dumps into the delta. The delta is nearly 210 km (130 miles) from north to south and ranges from 50 to 80 km (31 to 50 miles) wide, then flows into the Bering Sea of the Arctic Ocean.

I was pleased with myself for taking the aircraft instead of spending fourteen hours in a cold, open canoe at 15-20 mph. It gave me a chance to practice my navigation skills on a short flight in the comfort of a warm aircraft. On the flight over, I was flying at 500 feet above ground level, and you could see the ground the majority of the time. When I encountered heavy smoke for just a few minutes and zero visibility ahead, I would then fly back into light smoke. It gave me just a short burst of watching the instruments and some I.F.R. experience to keep the aircraft straight and level, and a short period of time watching the instruments and then coming out of the smoke on track and at the same altitude. My previous encounters with the clouds were always with a solid base and always for several thousand feet between the base of the clouds and the ground. Most often, the clouds represented some fairly rough air, and I got some practice keeping it on track, straight and level, and maintaining a good compass heading.

I was tied up most of the day with an investigation of an assault, finding witnesses, and taking statements and photographs of the aggressor. In the end, the person did not wish to lay any charges.

I had been involved most of the day and paid little attention to the diminishing visibility caused by the shift in wind and smoke in the air, with visibility in the valley down to about 100 feet. I figured when I took off there would be clearer air as there were no fires in the delta and above the valley. I thought it would be similar to the conditions I encountered on my trip over to the Arctic Red River.

I took off from the sandbar, and the forward visibility was very limited. I managed to go ten miles toward the delta by watching the embankment of the river on my left. When the reference of the embankment ended into the delta, I climbed to a thousand feet, as that would give me about four hundred feet over the land level of the ground between Arctic Red River and Fort McPherson, and set a track that I figured would take me home. When I came out of the sun shadow in the Mackenzie River embankments and climbed to the thousand-foot level, the smoke was lit up by the sun, and I could not even see the propeller at the front of the cowling.

The sun does not set at that latitude for about five months and continues to circle around the sky, not getting near the horizon until late August. It was not visible through the blanket of smoke, so the use of my sun compass was out of the question. I had considered returning to the Arctic Red River, but the likelihood of finding the notch of the river was not likely possible in the smoky conditions. Finding the river and then getting down on the sandbar was not considered possible. The fires had gotten much bigger during the day, and the wind had carried the smoke to the north, putting a lot more smoke into the air. Returning to the Arctic Red River, trying to find that slot in the 600-foot river banks, and being able to land on the sandbar did not make much sense. I set my track that would put me over Fort McPherson, and in fifteen minutes, there was no sign of the mile-wide Peel River or any indication of the trees below. There was a nagging thought that possibly there had been a change in the barometric pressure, and I could not recall if I had reset the altimeter at about ten feet above sea level, which is what it would be on the strip at Arctic Red River. 

So, I was not certain of the exact altimeter setting. I went lower and lower, and I was showing 100 feet on the altimeter when I saw trees directly below. I climbed a hundred feet up and continued on that track. When I started to see trees below, I knew I was in the foothills of the Richardson Mountains, which began to rise about 20 miles west of Fort McPherson. I had to climb up to make a turn and then come down to the altitude where I encountered seeing the trees, knowing that I would have a hundred feet of clearance above the trees by the Peel River. I set the same track that took me to the Arctic Red River and kept that up for fifteen minutes, not seeing the mile-wide Peel River on my return and going lower and lower until I could see the tops of the odd big spruce zip past below the wheels. At each turn, I had to pull up to safely make my turn and come back down to that same level above the trees and come onto the reverse compass heading back towards the Peel River.

I started calculating what I had for fuel. I was trying to remember the range, but I could only recall that I had 30 gallons of fuel on board when I took off from Fort McPherson, which usually gave me about four hours of fuel with some reserve. At cruise speed, it goes along at 114 mph, and the rate of climb was 88 feet per minute, but that was with maximum R.P.M power. I had a stall speed of 40 mph. The confusing part came when I realized that I had no recollection of what time I took off from the Arctic Red River, and I began making these calculations about the time I was concerned about how much time I still had in the air. The fuel consumption showed that I had less than half a tank showing on the sight gauges in the wing tanks, which had a tube from the bottom of the tank to the top that was visible inside the cabin.

I continued going east for 15 minutes, pulled up to make my turn, and came back down until I was at the considered safe altitude, then returned on the reverse track until I encountered the foothills rising again. I pulled up to make my turn and headed back, hoping to get a glimpse of the river or the settlement, but I saw absolutely nothing below me for the next two hours. When I got down well below the quarter of a tank showing on the sight gauges, I decided that I would come down after I made my turn and go to the lowest level that I could dare by keeping the trees in sight directly below me, hoping there were no abrupt hills as I kept the trees in sight all the way to the river. Several times, the wheels touched the tops of one or two tall spruce tree tops. Then, all of a sudden, the river appeared.

Then, the quandary hit me on whether I was upriver or downriver from Fort McPherson. I turned left because the river bank was on the pilot's side of the aircraft, and the top of the river bank was about fifty feet above the water, with fifty-foot trees lined up along the shore above that. I was about fifteen miles upriver from the settlement when I recognized exactly where I was in the Peel River and headed in the direction of home. When the river straightened out, I knew I had to go to the other side of the river to, where the sandbar and airstrip were located. I managed to slowly cross the river and found the other shoreline by angling slightly to the right. The smoke seemed to have lightened up just a little, and the sandbar appeared straight ahead. I dropped the power as I figured I was awfully close to empty on fuel and would not have enough fuel to make a turnaround for a landing into the wind. I rolled along on the sandbar and began braking as the weight of the aircraft overcame the lift of the wings at that speed. When the tail went down, the engine quit as the intake for the fuel was in the middle of the tanks, and it went to the back of the tank. I was completely out of fuel as I rolled to a stop, and that wide prop was standing vertically in front of the cowling.

I had frightened myself so much that I took the next scheduled flight out to Edmonton and sat in a Link trainer, getting my IFR endorsement from the Edmonton Flying Club. I could shoot any heading the instructor gave me, and I could shoot alternates and split the numbers. It was a pretty relaxed atmosphere as the Link's forward speed was zero, and I had all the confidence in the world because I was no longer going forward at more than a hundred miles an hour. I could shoot any heading right on with confidence. That was the story around getting an I.F.R. rating.

A few years later, when I was at Grande Prairie and the police aircraft, a “Turbo Beaver,” came in from Peace River, the pilot would phone me to see if I was available to sit in the right seat. He would be “under the hood” to shoot a number of approaches and landings. Peace River at that time did not have an ILS (Instrument Landing System) because the airport was considered a VFR (Visual Flight Rules) airport, as it was located down in the deep Peace River valley and was not set up for an ILS radio system. If you did not practice ILS landings regularly, you could not remain proficient at doing ILS landings safely. The “hood” is put on your head with an extended front so that you only have the instruments visible directly ahead of the pilot and cannot see what is happening outside. I would be sitting in the right seat and preventing anything from happening that was not going to be a safe landing. I kept a lookout for other aircraft in the immediate area of our flight. He always allowed me to put on the hood and see if I could take us back to the airport on the last flight of the day. Over the five years that I was there, I became proficient with doing ILS landings and approaches and helped others learn if their aircraft was equipped with ILS radio equipment.

 

Refurbishing TheAeronca15ac Sedan



Climbing out of the Municipal Airport in Edmonton, Alberta, I was about a thousand feet above ground level when the engine lost power, slowed, and came to a clattering stop with the propeller vertical in front of the cowling. I immediately called in a "Mayday," advising that I had engine trouble. I was over the rail yard and requested permission to return to the airport and land on the grass. The controller denied my request, repeatedly instructing me, “Stay away from the buildings,” at least four or five times. I tried restarting the engine, but it made a lot of noise. Despite this, I managed to make it around and land on the runway, then taxied to a tie-down area.

In the following days, I arranged for an aircraft engineer to help me take the wings off and remove the engine, which was then delivered to an overhaul shop. I also agreed to have the fabric replaced and the aircraft repainted, as it was a 1946 vintage and had not always been hung. I advanced money for the work as it progressed.

With the engine in one shop and the rest of the aircraft in another, I kept calling my friend at the RCMP hangar in Edmonton to check on progress, as both shops kept asking for more money. The engine shop finished the work in just over two weeks and delivered it to the airframe shop for installation. I made the final payment for their services.

I stopped hearing from the airframe shop for about a week. When I checked with my friend, he mentioned that he couldn’t reach anyone there either and had noticed the door locked on a recent visit, leaving him with a bad feeling. The next day, I went to the shop myself and found a sheriff’s notice attached to the door. Looking through the window, I saw the wings leaning against the wall, the entire airframe stripped of fabric, and the instrument panel empty.

I went to the sheriff's department with my logbooks and convinced them that the aircraft was mine. I arranged to pay a month's rent for the building to the owner and tried to find another aircraft engineer to finish the work. Staying with Doris and Cec Gale, I explained my situation. Cec helped make calls, but we struggled to find anyone available to take on the project. Finally, Cec agreed to sign off on the aircraft’s certification, provided everything was done to his satisfaction. He jokingly said his only tool was the pen in his shirt pocket.

The rolls of fabric and dope were already in the shop, so under Cec's direction, I began putting the aircraft back together. The original engineer had sent the instruments to another shop for servicing, even though some may not have needed it, so I had to pay for that as well. Eventually, I got everything installed and working properly under Cec’s strict supervision.

The aircraft originally had no defrost system on the windshield and a poor heater. Cec had me build a box around the muffler and run flexible piping up to the windshield base to provide warm air, similar to the Beaver and Otter systems. I also built a box under the dash with an adjustable door to direct heat to the legs and feet of the pilot and passengers. We even insulated the entire cabin for winter operations.

After inspecting all the linkage in the wings and covering everything with new fabric, I replaced the side windows, which were flat Plexiglas, while the forward cockpit Plexiglas had already been replaced before I purchased the aircraft. The insulation, with aluminum foil on both sides, brightened the interior of the aircraft considerably.

When we weighed the aircraft, it was perfectly balanced. The metal work around the muffler and the added insulation evened out the weight distribution. Cec signed off on the logbooks, certifying the aircraft as airworthy, but cautioned me that the compass would need recalibration due to all the new metal installed at the front. He explained that I could do this by flying north and south, adjusting the screws on the sides of the compass, or using a known alignment, such as a road.

I fueled the aircraft, and it started right away. The six-cylinder engine purred beautifully. After taxiing to the runway, I headed north. A few minutes out, I flew over the long runway at Namao Airport, which had large compass headings painted at each end. I began flying back and forth over the runway, tweaking the compass as I went. Suddenly, I had company—two jets appeared on either side of me, flying slowly with everything hanging out. The pilot on my left was motioning with his mic, clearly wanting to talk. I switched frequencies and made contact. They wanted to know why I was flying over an active military base. I explained that I was calibrating my compass after having my aircraft zero-timed and joked that highways don’t have large compass headings painted on them like the runway did. The pilot warned me, “Two more passes, then bugger off!” I replied with a joke, asking when they last corrected their own compasses.

After finishing my compass calibration, I headed for Fort McPherson, 1,917 kilometers (1,191 miles) from Edmonton. The new engine and paint job had improved my airspeed to 114 mph. I refueled at High Level, then at Fort Simpson and Norman Wells. Since it was only 431 kilometers (267 miles) from Norman Wells to Fort McPherson, I bypassed Fort Norman and flew directly to the sandbar airstrip at Fort McPherson.

By the time I returned home to Ontario, I had put over 10,000 miles under the wings of CF-OGP, and the aircraft was now completely zero-timed and ready for Arctic flying.

Soon after, I received word that I was being transferred from Fort McPherson to Coppermine. I needed to transport my aircraft, tundra tires and skis there. With marginal distances between stops, even though the aircraft was faster now, I rigged a fuel transfer system using a squeeze pump from an outboard motor and a ten-gallon tank secured in the back seat. This allowed me to transfer fuel into the right-wing tank during the flight.

I loaded up the tundra tires, skis, and supplies and took off on the 520-mile trip to Coppermine. The weather was great, and with a tailwind, I arrived with a quarter tank of fuel still left. I arranged a flight back to Fort McPherson and began preparing for the transfer from the bush to the barrens, with my aircraft safely tied down at Coppermine Airport.

 

Flight from Fort McPherson to Coppermine



With my impending transfer from Fort McPherson to Coppermine, my attention was drawn to how I was going to move my aircraft to the site of my new posting, and distance was the leading factor of concern. It was easy to consider that I had four hours of fuel on board, not considering possibly fifteen minutes of reserve. The aircraft traveled at 114 miles an hour with the small wheels and wheel pants, with the optimum range being 456 miles. The distance from Fort McPherson to Coppermine without any alternates would be impossible as it involved flying over to Inuvik and then to Coppermine, which would be an unreachable distance of 545 miles. Even if you refueled at Inuvik, it was not possible with 475 miles from Inuvik to Coppermine.

I had fuel caches down the Mackenzie River and over to Yellowknife, and the distance from Yellowknife was only 371 miles, so it was reachable but involved 1,106 miles of distance to travel. I looked at going up to Tuktoyaktuk and following the Arctic Coast across, but the distance from Tuk to Coppermine was ruled out because it was 571 miles, and I did not like the weather as it was usually not the best in the fall, and there were no weather stations between the two points. I was putting the outboard motors away for the fall, and the squeezable fuel pump on the fuel tank gave me a good idea. We had half a dozen of them in the shop in a box, and I had lots of ten-gallon empty fuel barrels around the compound that the helicopters had left behind.

I soldered a piece of metal tubing into a bung in a barrel, put lots of epoxy around it to make an assured airtight seal, and attached the pump to a hose leading up to the fuel tank in the left wing and another piece of hose inside to the bottom of the barrel. I secured the fuel tank with the seat belts. I loaded up the tundra tires and skis and waited for a good weather report from other pilots that currently flew east of Inuvik. I could check the weather on the single sideband radio with the weather in Coppermine and had them check with the pilots that flew up from Yellowknife on the scheduled flights into Coppermine. On the day the police plane was flying into Coppermine to fly the member I was replacing, I fired up my airplane and headed out. Four and a half hours later, I was sitting at the Coppermine airport when the RCMP plane landed. I flew back to Yellowknife with the police plane and then to Fort McPherson to join Jantje and our now two kids to be transferred to Coppermine.

Everyone of the houses is fully furnished and equipped with everything to cook and bake with and furnished with very durable furniture. All you have to do is pack your clothing and personal belongings with you on a transfer. I had constructed a number of wooden trunks that fit one inside another with six heavy leather handles that had slots so they laid flat and washers outside to give them lots of lifting strength. We had everything packed before I left.

Trouble with Being on Rations in Coppermine

We were going into a posting that was on “rations,” so we did not have to pack any food along other than our new baby food. The problem with being on rations was that you were eating things that were favored and ordered by previous members, sometimes three or four years prior. They had to have a couple of years of rations as the reliability of the shipping with Arctic ice conditions was not reliable. It was ordered through Ottawa, and they, in turn, ordered it out of Edmonton so that they could control what they thought were basic rations. From there, it was shipped by rail or transport truck to Hay River, then by river barge by the Northern Transportation Company across Great Slave Lake, down the Mackenzie River to the Arctic Ocean, along the Arctic coast, and into the Coronation Gulf to be off-loaded at Coppermine.

It was stored in a heated warehouse, and each month the food was rationed out and forms forwarded to Ottawa. Then they reduced what was taken off your salary, including the freight charges. There were things that you liked and things that were not pleasant to have to eat, like powdered milk and eggs. The canned bacon out of Norway and the canned Christmas puddings were in limited supply. There was no fresh fruit, and they were always canned and not in bottles as things were shipped on open barges and could encounter freezing temperatures in the late fall or early spring shipping. Each month you had to issue out your rations, including the condiments, and take it off the list of inventory of everything that we had in the warehouse. It was an all-day job keeping up the records just for the rations.

We did not have a vehicle or snowmobile when we arrived in Coppermine, so all we had to haul all of our re-supply from the barge to the warehouse was a steel-wheeled wheelbarrow that was 50 years old. It was a good three-quarters of a mile from where the barge was pushed to the beach and the heated warehouse. When the barge arrived, the Cpl. was in Yellowknife, and I was responsible for getting the entire shipment to the warehouse.

There were four other vehicles in the settlement, and they were all tied up hauling their own supplies off the barge. Every time I returned the wheelbarrow to the barge, there was a larger stack of RCMP-addressed goods that I had to sign off with the purser. When the warehouse was getting near to no more room with it piled seven feet high and some of the shelves that had always remained clear had to make room for new boxes, they were totally full. I had been running the old wheelbarrow back and forth for five fifteen-hour days and was totally exhausted, stiff, and sore.

At about that point, Father LaPointe came into the warehouse with a stack of invoices and wanted help in sorting out his supplies. He said he used the “RCMP” on his packages to cover the “Roman Catholic Mission Priest” so that his order would not be stolen or pilfered on the barge. He asked if he could leave what was ordered for the church in the heated warehouse. He said that the Catholic members in the past had allowed that, and he came on the day we handed out the rations. At that point, I was still tired and sore and became more than upset with what he had done and what he had just asked. I thought about how hard I had worked getting all those hundreds of wheelbarrow trips, and none of the people for whom the goods had been organized had been sent to help haul it up from the beach, nor had Father LaPointe been anywhere near the barge. I had seen him several times sitting or standing in the front of the church as I wheeled a load of packages up the gravel road to the warehouse.

When I wanted to see his list of orders, it was apparent that he had ordered food and perishables for about 20 or so different members of his parishioners. I told him to get all of the people that he had ordered food to come to the warehouse today and haul it over and put it in the church. At the end of the day, the rest of his order would be outside the heated warehouse, and he could pick it up from there. Within an hour, he had ten people hauling boxes from the warehouse to the church, which was about two hundred yards away.

 

Search For Overdue Canoeists



In the mid-summer of 1969, I was posted to Coppermine (now called Kugluktuk), N.W.T., and received a radio call from the Tuktoyaktuk Detachment on the Single Sideband radio (SSB). They informed me that two people had come to their detachment and were intent on camping on the river that flows into the Arctic Ocean east of Paulatuk. They had obtained a permit for their trip from the government in Yellowknife. The two were ornithologists (bird watchers) and had planned to be there for three weeks. They were going to rent a canoe at Paulatuk and travel around the big headland before heading up the river from there. He had checked with the Hudson Bay manager, who informed him that the pair had not returned the canoe and that the water in the rivers was quite low locally due to light winter snowfall. The manager also mentioned that they had trouble fishing for char because of the low water. The ornithologists had stated they were going up the Hornady River as far as they could go by canoe and had ample food and clothing.

He chuckled when he told me that the Hornady River was in our Detachment area, and we would have to conduct the search from our point. He mentioned that Arctic pack ice had come south and was along the shore at Tuktoyaktuk, making a canoe trip from there currently impossible. When I asked how far it was from Coppermine, he said he knew it was at least 75 miles farther away from Tuktoyaktuk. He had already checked with Inuvik and Yellowknife for a police plane, but they were being serviced in Edmonton and not available to aid in the search. He had also checked the availability of rental aircraft in Inuvik, but the only aircraft available was a twin-engine Beechcraft, which was tied up with scheduled flights around the Mackenzie Delta and not available for more than a week.

I considered that we had the Detachment’s 45-foot diesel-powered sailboat, the “JJENNINGS,” but it could only travel at six knots. A 175-mile trip with the 26-foot canoe and 18-horsepower outboard on deck would take several days, assuming there was no pack ice along the coast between Kugluktuk and the Hornady River. I had my own aircraft with plenty of gas, sitting on the strip with tundra tires, ready for a flight. The weather was good, and I was eager for the comfort of a warm seat in the aircraft instead of a cold two-day trip by canoe, followed by a return trip along the Arctic coast, which was still uncertain due to the potential presence of ice. Additionally, the reported low water levels in the Hornady River might make it difficult to navigate the 26-foot freighter canoe with the 18-hp outboard motor.I phoned the DEW Line site, which was about 80 miles out of Coppermine (Kugluktuk), to notify them that I would be passing by in an hour and conducting a search for two overdue people in the area of the Hornady River. I told them if I located them, I would be climbing to an elevation where they could surely see me before landing in that area and asked if they could keep track of my location. I would appreciate it.

   

 

About a week earlier, I had flown over to the site and told them that if they could spot me coming, I would buy lunch. I had been there twice before, once in the winter, and knew I could fly low in the river valley that led right out to the DEW Line site. I phoned them before taking off and stayed close to the ground until I reached the river, then went out to the coast and radioed them when I was on the airstrip. I asked if they would mind picking me up at their airstrip and buying me dinner. They said they had turned their antennas as low as possible to the south and did not even get a blip of me on their screens. The DEW Line, created during the Cold War in the 1950s to watch for potential Russian bombers, stands for “Distant Early Warning.” Some sites are still manned, while others have been dismantled and abandoned across the Arctic, stretching from Baffin Island to Alaska.



I flew past the DEW Line site, gave them a big wing-wobble, and continued along the Arctic coast until I reached the Hornady River. About 30 miles up, I was surprised to find no water running over the riffles in the river. About 20 miles further, I located their camp, marked by a fluorescent orange tent and the two people waving. I climbed to the elevation as promised for the DEW Line and then came back down to land on a sandbar beside their camp. It was a man-and-wife team; she was an ornithologist as well. They thought I had not seen them when I climbed away and kept circling ever higher. I explained that I was doing that maneuver to be spotted by the DEW Line radar site so they would know where I planned to land.

They had encountered low water and decided to move their camp quite a few miles into the tundra, as they had never encountered so many different birds nesting in the area and wanted to photograph them all for his next book. When they returned to the river five days later, there was not enough water to float the canoe. They had been working their way downriver, carrying their camp and canoe for miles. I advised them that they had another 20 miles before they could find enough water to float the canoe and that they would need to portage around any rapids. They had snared a few rabbits and were not concerned about running out of food.

I gave them some emergency chocolate bars and dry soups from the plane to help extend their food supply. I took off and was back in Coppermine in just under two hours. I phoned the DEW Line, and they gave me the exact coordinates of where I had landed and confirmed that they had watched my return flight as well. They said it was a good exercise for them, as they spent most of their time looking towards Russia and only spotted commercial flights going over the top between Europe and North America.

I notified the Tuktoyaktuk Detachment of their situation and current location. They would have the Hudson Bay man contact the Tuk Detachment when he got back with the canoe and arrange for an aircraft to take them to Inuvik for their return south. A month later, I received a “Peterson Field Guide to Western Birds” in the mail and a big thank you for the effort to check on them. It made them realize that checking in with the RCMP was worthwhile and gave them a sense of how vast the Northwest Territories really are, with no signs of habitation.

 

 

Recover of Bodies In The Open Ocean.



When we got the Services Diving Club up and running, and after a few members were trained, we usually had divers available for underwater recovery missions. Initially, the Canadian Army, Navy, Air Force, and RCMP were involved. Later, members from Memorial University, particularly those involved in Marine Biology studies, joined us. I had been selected to go to New York to get my instructor’s rating. Most of the interested members had done their training in one or more local pools, completed their open-water tests, and had a few dives under their belts.

I was contacted and informed that a group of locals had held a big party on the beach down by Logy Bay. During the night, they decided to push a rotten old dory back off the beach and head towards a cod trap to catch some fish. Five of them were in the dory, using driftwood as paddles. Shortly after setting off, yelling and screaming were heard, followed by silence. The next morning, the dory was found back on the beach, with the back of it broken out. It was believed that one of them had fallen backward and broken the dory, causing it to sink with everyone aboard.

With the cold waters of the North Atlantic, very few Newfoundlanders learn to swim, as most rivers are rapid-filled, and even the smaller lakes rarely warm up enough for comfortable swimming. I got three other divers interested in joining me inthe search. We located the campfire, which was still smoldering, and the locals pointed out the location of the cod trap about a mile off the point. Several boats were already searching the bay for survivors, and we commandeered one of the trap skiffs to take us offshore. We also requested that the other boats tie onto the skiff to ensure we weren’t run over while diving.

It was decided that we would conduct a search pattern between the campfire and the cod trap. We would swim for five minutes, then gather at the boat based on our bubble trails. At each interval, the boats would drop their anchors, and we would conduct search patterns from that point, using visibility between divers as the width of our pattern. After each five-minute swim, we would gather, check the compass direction using a chalkboard I had, and spread out to the visibility limit before starting the next leg of the search.

On the third search, I was the first to find one of the victims. On their way back, the others found two more bodies at a depth of 50 feet. We surfaced, but it was difficult to get the fishermen to assist in getting the bodies into the boats, partly due to fear of dead bodies and concern about what other villagers might say. Eventually, they helped us.

We continued the search and soon found the fourth body. This time, the fishermen were more willing to assist. While diving, I kept track of my surroundings, checking the compass heading and maintaining an equal distance from my partners. At one point, I noticed a shadow and thought my dive partner was getting ahead of me. I kicked harder to keep up. When the five-minute leg ended, I stopped to gather with the others. One of my partners grabbed the chalkboard and wrote, “Why so fast?” with a couple of question marks. The others read it and pointed at me.

It turned out that the shadow I had been following was not my dive partner but a great white shark, at least 15 feet long and three feet in diameter, which had passed between the four of us just two feet away. We all immediately surfaced and got into the boat with the lowest sides. It was agreed that our search for the fifth person was over, as we believed the shark had likely eaten the last victim.

Fishermen in Newfoundland often discard the heads and innards of their catch back into the ocean, attracting various species of sharks. There have been sightings of 28 different species of sharks in Canadian waters, 14 of which are commonly found around Newfoundland. Hammerhead sharks are often seen while diving, and I had encountered whale sharks, longfin makos, sandbar sharks, silky sharks, and Icelandic cat sharks, but this was my first encounter with a great white shark. Having witnessed several of them attacking seals on a beach near Harbour Breton, it was not an experience I wanted to repeat.

This was the first open-ocean body recovery by scuba divers that I know of. Two of the divers were members of the RCMP;one was with Army Intelligence, and another was a Major in the Army. I had the sad duty of notifying the next of kin for the four families, recounting our close call with the great white shark that ended the search for their seventeen-year-old son.



 

Aircraft of Tundra



As an explanation of the geographical location that I continue to refer to as Coppermine, I feel that I have to explain some of the confusion to keep you abreast of the changes that we encountered.I was stationed there as the number two man from September 1969 until July of 1971, although the government decided to change all of the geographic locations where there were settlements and not the other known and named places.I had difficulty relating the Intuit names as all the mapping had not caught up to the name changes to become familiar enough with them to identify what place they were referring to with the new name.I could not spell some of the names and had difficulty pronouncing them, let alone remembering the old name to geographically locate that settlement, so you will have to bear with me using the old name of Coppermine.

Now, it is named Kuglugtuk, and to help you geographically locate it, it is still situated west of the mouth of the Coppermine River on the mainland of the Arctic coast, overlooking the Coronation Gulf as part of the Arctic Ocean. The hamlet changed its name in 1996 to Kugluktuk, which means "place of rapids," referring to the rapids at Bloody Falls, 15 km upstream on the Coppermine River.To further confuse the reader, they divided the Northwest Territories into two separate territories, and the easterly portion put Kuglugtuk in the Nunavut area, with the N.W.T. border just west of there.It had a population of about 1200 people when I was stationed there.The traditional language was Inuinnaqutun, which is written in the Latin alphabet to add to the confusion. Thanks to the Catholic fathers who filtered north in the mid-1800s, Intuit spoke six languages across the North, each having as many as three dialects.Across the eastern Arctic, it is written in Syllabic symbols, but the majority of younger Intuit all speak and understand English.

We had Akalavik on the west side of the Mackenzie delta, and they wanted to build an airport and needed gravel for roads; the airport base on that side of the delta is just delta mud, where they were going to build an airport on the east side of the delta where they had lots of gravel.Then, on July 18, 1958, it became Inuvik, which means "Place of Man" in the local Inuvialuktun language, officially began by proclamation of the 15th session of the Council of N.W.T.Inuvik was the first planned town North of the Arctic Circle.Where Aklavik was known as the first to be known as (Akłarvik) (from the Inuvialuktun, meaning - (barren ground grizzly place), it was established as a trapping and trading centre because of the rich muskrat fur harvesting in the late 1800s; with a population of over 1,500, the community served as the Regional Administrative Centre for the Territorial Government.

Building conditions at the time were considered to be unsuitable because of the delta mud, and no gravel was known to exist within a reasonable distance from the community, aggravated by the permafrost in the area.With a bit of rain, it became a sea of slippery, sticky slime and deep ruts from the vehicle traffic, and when it dried, the dust stayed in the air for an hour from a vehicle traveling down the street.

Back to my story:

In the late spring of 1970, the manager of the Coppermine Co-Op had asked if I would take a flight south up the Coppermine River to look for some moose and see if we could locate where the caribou herds were located south of settlement for the benefit of the co-op members. I was always looking for an excuse to head out of the settlement with my aircraft and agreed to take him on a trip.It was a nice sunny Saturday morning as the sun had returned above the horizon after its three-month sojourn, and the temperature was just -20 below zero Fahrenheit. I had figured I had four hours of fuel on board, and the Coppermine River was wide and meandering, with dozens of rivers and creeks coming into the river on both sides.About a hundred miles south, it began to get very narrow and turned into more or less a canyon, and it was not likely moose pasture much beyond that point, so with a few short side trips, I had estimated that we would be back before darkness again prevailed.I had checked the weather and was anticipating another week of the same conditions with no storms forecast, so we would be flying south into the low sun, and the sky was clear of any clouds as far as I could see.In aerodynamic terms, it is called CAVU (Ceiling And Visibility Unlimited). 

I had difficulty with my aircraft on skies out at the airport after they had recently ploughed the drifts off the airstrip and the gravel strips; when your aircraft was on the skies, it made it difficult on the skis for takeoffs and quite dangerous when landing.Another reason I had chosen to put the aircraft down on the sea ice of the Coronation Gulf was that the Eskimo kids had visited my aircraft (according to the size of the mukluk tracks in the snow, and I figured there had been four of them).They must have figured that my aircraft was their own candy store and had cleaned out almost all of my emergency food supply.I figured that I carried about a week's supply of groceries in dried meat and dried foodstuff, chocolate bars and high energy bars, even a small bottle of lard, tea bags, a hot chocolate mix, and "Freshy"to take the taste off of even swamp water.I had a self-stacking frying pan, small pots, lots of candles, .22 shells, and my survival Browning semi-automatic take-down rifle with a scope.I had a small fuel canister stove that fit inside the pot that was used for making tea and hot chocolate. I had two sleeping bags and a double-layered Arabian silk tent that would accommodate two people for shelter, and it only weighed two pounds.I had it all secured in a packsack underneath the rear seat.The sleeping bags had their own canvas bags with straps. I had replenished survival food after I moved the aircraft down onto the sea ice.

Another reason for moving the aircraft off the airport runway was to do with flying with skis on the aircraft, as you have no brakes.You just slide along until all that kinetic energy is dissipated from the weight of the aircraft and your landing speed.With hard-packed snow on the 5,000-foot runway, there is very little friction created until the lift of the wings and ground effect are dissipated and the weight of the aircraft comes down on the skis.The runway has a good layer of gravel built up, so it was flat and level, and the six or so feet of it as not to thaw the permafrost below and getting the aircraft back up onto the runway sometimes proved difficult when it continued on off the end of the built-up area and off into the tundra that had a slope towards the ocean.

Another reason for moving the aircraft down onto the sea ice is that I would have abetter chance of seeing and possibly catching the delinquents if they were to visit my aircraft again because it was very visible from most of the settlement.The airport was up on a hill about five miles out of the settlement, and locating the aircraft down onto the sea ice was within comfortable walking distance from my residence.I had prepared anchors drilled into the ice and frozen in to secure the aircraft when it was parked.It was a flat, clear area of unbroken ice of the Coronation Gulf of the Arctic Ocean that extended for miles along the shore with no snow cover. That strip of ice was the back of a string of islands that extended about 20 miles parallel to the shoreline and never developed open water cracks from the tidal action.It was about a mile wide from shore to the islands that rose a couple hundred feet from the sea.These islands were a part of a basalt rift that extended repeatedly across most of the tundra area south of Coppermine.The reason is that there was no snow on the ice in that higher as they got closer to the settlement.

I had flown the aircraft down onto the sea ice and parked it off the alignment of the commercial ice strip in front of the settlement.I had made anchors in the ice to tie the aircraft down as it was an area that was totally clear of any snow cover and polished clear ice for hundreds of yards in every direction.I had placed short willow branches in the ice, setting out a temporary runway that was usually into the wind so that I would provide some depth perception for landings on the polished surface.What happens in still water or, in this case, shiny ice surface? You have the sky reflected on the surface, and until you are right at the surface of the water or ice, you cannot judge the distance accurately for a round-out to land smoothly.With poor depth perception, you could be on the surface still coming down at your rate of decent, or, worse;you could round out anticipating the contact with the surface when you were still fifty to a hundred feet in the air and spin into the ground.I had also placed a largenumber of juice cans with rolls of toilet paper and dampened with diesel with plastic lids so they could be set alight in the event of my need or any other aircraft to land when it was dark.They all provided more depth of perception a lot further back when making an approach to land. 

The big ice airstrip located directly in front of the settlement had battery-powered lights that allowed the Lockheed C-130 Hercules aircraft to land when they were delivering fuel for the settlement.When the "fuel lift" was finished, the lights went with them for their next assignment.A big D-8 Cat had ploughed that airstrip with a cable blade to remove the snow, and it left quite high snow banks with big blocks of crusted snow on both sides of the runway, and there were snow banks along the entire length.There was just room for the Hercules to turn at the end, where they pulled off to transfer the fuel out of the bladders that carried the fuel in the fuselage of the aircraft.

My aircraft had an insulated engine cover that extended to the ice surface, and a bit and wing covers had been put on the wings to prevent frost crystals from forming on the metal wings that would dramatically affect the efficiency of the wings to develop lift.It also made it really easy to move snow off the wings if it had snowed.I had made a means of warming the engine with what I had named "The Poor Man's Herman Nelson," which I modified from a Volkswagen van gasoline heater and set it up it to blow heat into the cowling and warm the aircraft engine and battery.It was a gas-fired heater that worked quite well.I took some time getting the engine up to temperature as it was -20 F, and there was about a 20 - 25 mph wind, so I kept my heater company until I got some engine temperature on the gauges.

With the engine up to temperature and the battery quite warm, I started the engine and allowed it to warm up. I talked to the local Department of Transport office on the radio and notified them of our intended flight, and they could open my flight plan when I flew past the D.O.T. office on my flight south. 

After I ran up the engine, I decided to check in at home, phone the co-op manager, and tell him to meet me on the plane in about fifteen minutes. We were all ready to head out to look for moose and caribou.When I got to my residence, our four-year-old daughter Sherry was all dressed and wanted to go outside to play.My wife queried me about how long I had anticipated being away.I told her that we should be back in a couple of hours.She suggested that Sherry would enjoy going on an airplane ride, and I reluctantly agreed to take her with me on that airplane ride.I decided to take the Ski-doo as I had Sherry with me, and it was a long way for a four-year-old to walk. I then picked up the Co-op Manager en route and went down to the aircraft.I did a full inspection and "walked around the aircraft," checking the fuel caps on the top of the wings and all the controls for freedom. I untied the rope from the anchor in the ice on the left wing, and a left rope was tied on the right wing hard point on the wing.I retied the knot so it would come undone by pulling the slack end of the rope.The ropes were left attached to the wing for convenience as they took up very little drag when in flight.

The rope on the left wing hard point was left tied to the anchor in the ice.It was much longer, and the knot was tied so that it could be pulled and released when you were inside the aircraft cabin.I started up the engine and let it get up to temperature again, checked the mags and all the instrumentation, and set the altimeter right at the true to sea level. I then revved the engine to take the aircraft forward while still anchored on the right wing.It went in a slight circle, and I managed to go forward enough to get the skis off the little blocks I had underneath the skies and prevent them from freezing into the ice.When I let off the throttle, the aircraft slowly rotated back past facing into the wind and went 90 degrees around until the side of the aircraft was facing against the wind.My passenger (not being a pilot) pulled the rope, and the knot came off the anchor.We slowly started to slide sideways downwind.I tried applying some prop speed, and that increased the speed of our sideways slide.

I think what was happening was the wind, now blowing at about 30 mph, had a high-pressure area along the entire right side of the fuselage and tail area, and the prop was increasing a low pressure by blowing the air alongside the fuselage and tail.I tried taking the prop rpm up twice more, and our sideways drift increased both times.We sat going sideways, and I figured it was not all that bad because there were scattered snow patches closer to shore, and that would surely slow our sideway drift, and I would physically be able to turn the aircraft into wind when we stopped going sideways.

That was not going to be the case, because the left ski caught a crack in the ice, and we came to an abrupt, complete halt.We tilted heavily, and the left wing went down against the ice with the flat of the dihedral at the end of the wing on the ice.When it righted itself, the rubber suspense of the landing gear popped the left ski out of the crack. Slowly, it returned to our sideways drift until we started to contact small patches of snow that were scattered randomly on the ice surface. We were going backward with the direction of the wind to the wind, and then one ski would catch a patch of snow under one ski, and we would go around in tight circles until we would catch another random patch of snow, and it invariably ended up with us still going downwind.

After almost a mile into the bay, we encountered rough river ice, and it finally came to a stop.I had shut down the engine with the idea of getting out and maybe hanging onto the tail so we could better direct our path that was not sideways.When we finally came to a complete stop, we were still facing downwind.I got out and went around to inspect the end of the wing, and there was not even a mark on the new paint, so it had not been contacted the ice before the aircraft went back to level and onto the other ski when we hit that crack.I inspected the bungee cord suspension and had my passenger rock wings up and down to ensure the suspension was in good order. I rocked the wing a few times up and down on both sides, and it was solid. Then, I checked the tail section.Before I got into the aircraft, I got up and checked the filler cap on the right wing.

During its lifetime, it has been used as a flight instruction aircraft as it has dual controls, a dual instrument panel, and dual rudder peddles.It had a channel radio, compass and I had installed a radio compass that you could also tune into local AM and F.M. radio stations, as well as a sun compass for the extended 24-hour daylight for flying in the daylight (when it was not overcast) during the extended 24-hour daylight for over nine months of the summer, at the Latitude where I was stationed.With the sun compass, you have to have a very accurate watch because the sun goes around the horizon in the north and back up into the sky in the southern quadrant.With not knowing the exact time from the charts that came with the sun compass, your tract could be four or five degrees.If you are flying out 100 miles, you could miss your destination by 30 miles with just a few minutes of error.I had no great need of an ILS (instrument landing system), which is a radio navigation system that provides short-range guidance to the aircraft to allow you to approach the airport at night or in bad weather;it allows an aircraft to approach until it is 200 feet over the ground and within a half mile of the runway.

When I was flying in the North, the nearest airport with ILS was in Inuvik West, which was 475 miles - 735 km, and the next one south was Yellowknife, which was 371 miles - 589 km south of Coppermine.The only close radio beacon was Contwoyto Lake, about 285 miles southeast of Coppermine. It was put in during the Dew Line construction and was presently used for Jet travel at high altitudes for passenger traffic going over the top of the world from Europe and the returning flights on that route.It was no use to me as I could not get high enough to use that radio beacon.I was limited to being able to climb just over 12,000 feet, and those big guys were up there at 30 to 40,000 feet.

In some years past, I had flown into the Edmonton Industrial airport, and when taking off out of the airport, I was about 800 feet above ground level and just away from the airport, a short distance under full power, climbing outwhen the engine swallowed a value.With a lot of clattering and banging, the propeller became very wide right in front of me. That has to be another event to be related, as well as the total zero time on the engine and airframe that was completed after that incident.I should describe the aircraft further to help you become more familiar with my plane.The following are all the physical details of the aircraft that I owned, rebuilt, serviced, and flew all over the North and across Canada for some nine and a half years. The only inconvenience of the Aeronca aircraft is that it only has one door on the passenger's right side, so the pilot has to get into the aircraft first and into the left seat before the passenger on the right can enter.The passengers in the back seats have to get in before the front passenger can be seated.

-1948 Aeronca 15AC "Sedan"serial number 105, of 561 aircraft of this model that were built.-Equipped with a six-cylinder flat 145 hp Continental 0300-Aengine.-Has a 52-inch aluminum propeller.

-Maximum speed - 129 mph - 208 km/h

-Cruise Speed - 114 mph -183 km/h at sea level at 75% power

-Stall Speed 43 mph - 69 km/h

-Range: 456 miles-734 km

-Service Ceiling: 12,400 feet A.S.L. (Above Sea Level)

-Rate of Climb: 88 feet/minute

-Maximum Take-Off Weight:2050 pounds

-Empty Weight without fuel: 1170 pounds

-30 gallons of fuel full tank:189 pounds @ 6.3 lbs /gallon

-Maximum Take-off Payload:880 pounds

-Wing Length: 37 feet 6 inches

-Length: 25 feet 4 inches

-Height: 6 feet 1.2 inches

-Wing Length: 37 feet - 6 inches

-Length: 25 feet - 4 inches

-Height: 6 feet- 1.2 inches

-Wing Area: 200 square feet

-Wing loading: 10.3 lbs/square feet

-Power Mass: 14.1 lbs/H.P.

-Glide Ratio: 7 to 1

-Accommodates pilot and three passengers. 

When everything was checked out, and I was satisfied that the plane suffered no damage, we turned the aircraft into wind, and both got in. I started up the engine and was airborne in minutes. I made a circle, went past the settlement, and dipped my wings as the D.O.T. radio operator was standing outside the D.O.T. building. He waved his arms and pointed south with both arms, so I knew he had my flight plan recorded.

The Coppermine River meanders going south with 500 - 800 foot banks on the sides at random places in most of the areas we traveled, and I had been below those higher hills as we traveled above the river.It was gentle sweeping turns, and we pulled up after seeing several cow moose and calves and came to where it narrowed into a canyon area that would not be considered "moose pasture." He wanted to see if we could locate a bull moose.Before pulling up to gain elevation, I noticed that I was putting in more aerolon pressure to recover from right turns.We decided to go back and check some of the side creeks and rivers that came into the Coppermine River on both sides.When we had completed the turnaround and was straight and level, I glanced at the left wing fuel gauge, a small plastic tube that went into the cockpit from the fuel tank in the wing and was empty.I looked at the gauge in the right wing, and it was down to half.There was no way to stop the flow from either wing as both leads went to the fuel filter and then to the carburetor and motor.We had been flying about 500 feet above the river, following the sweeping bends of the river, and we were underway for about an hour and a half. When we left, I figured we had more than four hours of fuel on board. 

I immediately grabbed the radio mike and declared an emergency with the usual "MAYDAY - MAYDAY." there was no response from Yellowknife or Coppermine. I figured that I had been in the river, and when I began to climb, figuring if I got higher, there was a better chance of someone hearing my distress call if there was any other aircraft that could hear our plight.It was very apparent that at that rate of consumption or loss, we did not have sufficient fuel to make it back to Coppermine.I immediately began to climb when I got no response from my "mayday" call on the radio while low to the ground and in the river valley.I got no response from repeated calls as I climbed, and I was given my last known position. There was trouble with my fuel supply and my heading, which was more or less off to the northwest.I was also trying to get away from the rough terrain by the river and in search of a larger lake to attempt a landing on.I had sort of planned on trying to hit the trapping trail that went between Coppermine and the copper exploration camp at Chapman Lake as it went along high ground most of the way and a lot of fairly smooth ground or a larger lake to attempt to land if we ran completely out of fuel.

During the years of the Vietnam War, from 1963 to 1973, there was a great interest in discoveries of more copper for the bullets the Americans were firing.With the name Coppermine on the map, there was a great deal of interest in exploring the area.They had established an exploration camp set up at Chapman Lake about 60 - 70 miles east of Coppermine, and they had fuel for the helicopters and aircraft that were brought in from Yellowknife by going on the Great Bear Lake by barge to Port Radium, that is, a mining town on the northeastern shore of Great Bear Lake, N.W.T., by the settlement of Cameron Bay as well as the Eldorado and Echo Bay mines where the uranium was mined that was used in the Atomic Bombs that ended the conflict with Japan during World War II.With cat trains and big wheeled semi-trailers, a whole camp of trailers for prospectors and helicopter pilots, as well as a huge supply of food and fuel for helicopters and aircraft.They had a watchman there over the winter, and I had visited him about once a month by going out on the well-traveled trappers' trail by ski doo and once by my aircraft.We were concerned for his health as he was almost 80 years old and in poor health condition.The trap line trail went right past the Chapman Lake camp.

The natives living in the Coppermine area were known as the Copper Eskimos because they had found ingots of copper of all shapes and sizes and used them for their arrowheads, spears, fish spears, snow knives for making igloos, and ornamentation.It appeared as free copper on the surface of the ground in all shapes and sizes.The largest one that I saw was where a prospector had hauled it into the settlement of Holman Island up on Victoria Island, and it must have been near bronze because it had taken him almost a week to hacksaw the end of the nugget off.I believed that it must have weighed in excess of a thousand pounds.It was about six long, two feet wide, about a foot thick down the middle, and about two inches thick all around the edges.

 

Holman Island (or now Ulukhaktok) was the most northerly settlement that we Policed from Coppermine, and we would go up on the sked flight and stay for a week to ten days, depending on the scheduled flights and the amount of freight that they had for Holman Island.Then, we would have accommodation in our Patrol Cabin, and there were about 850 residents there.Like other small traditional communities in the territories, hunting, trapping, and fishing are the major sources of income, but printmaking at their co-op has taken over as the primary source of income in recent years. The two principal languages in Ulukhaktok are the Kangiryuarmiutun dialect of Inuinnaqtun, which is politically part of the Inuvialuktun group, and English.The village has the world's most northerly golf course, and I played the nine holes with pink balls with the Hudson Bay manager.Hewould take a month off every summer, go back to Scotland, and play golf every day that he was there.His whole house was carpeted with astroturf, and there were holes in every corner, with lots of lays, and the building was shifting on the permafrost.

I continued to climb until we were at 8,000 feet and continually using the radio to attempt to contact some radio station or other aircraft that might be in the air or in the area and broadcast my "Mayday" signal, but the return radio was silent with the volume turned up as high as it would go.I leveled off and reduced the rpm on the engine with the idea of extending the fuel and did some banks ever so slightly, figuring I would stretch the fuel burn and get as much fuel out of the tanks as I could.All the while looking for a larger lake to appear below us.I spotted quite a large lake a few miles ahead of us, and about that time, it got very quiet in the airplane, and the engine sputtered to a stop with the prop vertical in front of the cabin.You cannot imagine how wide a propeller is when you are at 8,000 feet and you are out of fuel.

The first words uttered by the Co-Op manager from the time I declared my first "mayday" was,"What are you going to do now?" Trying to make light of the subject, my response was, "I think we will pull over and park over on that lake ahead, and I promise to make you a cup of tea, and then we will wait until someone comes and picks us up." I directed him by saying, "What I want you to do is to keep your eye on that lake, as it will be safer to try and put down a reasonable flat surface."All the while, he continued to pull the strap on the seat belt tighter.Sherry was in the back seat, wrapped in a sleeping bag and strapped in with both seat belts.Keeping the nose down below the horizon and listening to the sound of the wind around the fuselage was the only indication that we were making good forward speed that was not excessive, and it was apparent that the glide ratio of the Aeronca was so good that we were going to make the lake without any difficulty.Keeping our noses at a point near the other end of the lake, we seemed to have no crosswind to be concerned about.I swung it around to point at a smaller lake, and from what I could determine, the air was calm, and there was no wind to worry about in which direction to land.I continued to use the radio to broadcast our plight, and now you could hear the static on the radio in the quiet cockpit, but there was no response from any radio station or aircraft.

As we got close to the lake, I realized that we were too high and would have to lose more than a thousand feet to get to the level of the hills surrounding the lake before we could attempt to go down into the valley to land on the lake.I started to do "dog bones," which is a long lateral flight back and forth with dropping the nose to pick up speed before the sharp turn, level off in the other direction, and do the same thing again within what was a good glide ratio to the lake.About half a dozen of them brought us down to the level of the top of the hills, and I headed for the edge of the lake.

At that point, I realized the hills were quite steep, and I had no free air to make any more "dog bones" to stall the approach of the shoreline.I tried one "side slip," but it was lazy coming back forward, so I did not try another of those to lose altitude.I was watching the hill out both sides of the aircraft, and I could hear from the rush of air around the cockpit that we were gaining speed, which we did not need for a short landing on skis because you have no brakes and only the resistance of the skis on the hard-packed snow.When I looked ahead to try and determine some depth perception for a round out on the lake surface and looked out in the lake a short distance, to my surprise, there was a line of black basalt island right across our path.I shoved my nose down and made contact with the lake surface, and it was a fairly rough touchdown when I rounded out with drifted snow.I looked down and saw that we were doing almost 100 mph on the airspeed indicator, which was close to our cruise speed.The black wall of rock seemed to get higher and higher as we got nearer.

When we got within about 200 feet of the rock face, I pulled the nose up, and we cleared the rocks by a good 50 feet and then shoved the nose down again, rounded out with the skis rattling along and bouncing us back in the air with every hard snow drift we came in contact with and the heavy elastic rubbers of the landing gear aggravated it.I was concerned that I would run out of airspeed and ideas at the same time, but I managed to do a three-point landing on some clear snow with no cross drifts and looked again at the airspeed indicator; we were still doing about 80 mph. The lift of the wings at that speed was taking up the weight of the aircraft, and no weight was being transferred to the skis to slow us down.On a normal "Take-Off," the plane would lift off and climb at 50 mph, with the prop wash added to the lift on the wings.When we got to the drifted area again, I had enough rudder control to turn, so we went along the drift pattern.I tried to maneuver back and forth over the drift pattern to lose some more momentum as the shoreline was coming up fairly fast, and before I lost rudder control, I managed to turn alongside the shoreline, and the aircraft finally came to a creaky stop from the noise of the skis on the hard-packed snow almost to the end of the lake, which was a good thing because the shoreline had about a ten-foot embankment.

Everything became totally quiet, and I noticed that my front-seat passenger was grunting a lot.He had pulled the seat belt so tight from repeated yanks that he was unable to get it undone and was having some difficulty in breathing.We finally managed to get his seat belt undone, and it surprised me that our daughter was still asleep in the back seat, oblivious to our predicament.

I got the emergency backpack out of from under the back seat with the idea of making him the promised cup of tea.I could not believe our poor misfortune.The locals had done us a great life-threatening disservice again and cleaned out every bit of foodstuff, leaving the few packets of "Freshy" to mix with bad-tasting water, and only two tea bags in the bottom of the pack had been missed.It was decided that he would take the high-powered rifle and go to the top of the hill to the west and see if he could spot some caribou, and while Sherry was still sleeping, I would take the .22 rifle and scout along the shoreline willows in case there were some ptarmigan or arctic hare that we could have for supper before darkness set in.I covered a good mile of the shoreline and did not see anything and, headed back to the aircraft right across the Lake.By the time my partner got back to the aircraft, the shades of darkness had caught up to us, and I would periodically turn the aircraft lights on to try to guide him home.I managed to melt enough snow to make a pot of tea from one of the two bags that were left in the emergency food pack.He had seen no tracks of any animal on his about four-mile hike into the next valley.

I slept with Sherry in the back seat with her inside the sleeping bag, and my partner slept in the other sleeping bag across the two front seats.We used the insulated engine cover and wing covers to add to the comfort of the sleeping bags in the minus 20-degree cold and slept comfortably, considering the cramped area of the cockpit.We awoke while it was still totally black outside, and the only flashlight we had was one that you had to shake to create 30 seconds of light.I melted more snow, and we drank the last tea.

It was decided that we would walk in the northwest direction, and I had two compasses in the pockets of my emergency pack.He was going to take a path about a mile apart and hoped that we would have a better chance of seeing caribou, arctic hares, or ptarmigan so we would double our chances of getting game on the separate paths for food.I left a note in the aircraft of our intention and intended direction of travel and headed out.

I carried Sherry in the backpack with the sleeping bag wrapped around her, and periodically, I would have her walk to keep her circulation going.The snow was hard-packed, and you did not even leave a track while walking in the mukluks that I was wearing.I had a roll of brightly coloured seismic tape that I would tie a piece to any little willow sprig that I came across, and if I located a few willow sprigs, I would pick a handful to take with me for markers, and that way I could look back and keep a fairly straight line of where I had traveled and leave my trail well marked.I periodically could see my hunter off a mile or two to the east with the aid of the binoculars.He came upon one of the Basalt rifts with about a 100-foot face, and I could see that he was headed my way along the edge.I happened to be at a place where you could safely make your way down, so I waited for him to come my way.

It was about 10:00 am when we heard the sound of a single-engine "Otter" aircraft off to our east.You could make it out with the binoculars, and you could hear that distinctive single-engine "Otter" sound in the stillness of the day.It was traveling south, and soon, the sound was no longer heard.About noon, we made the top of another valley and could hear the sound again of the same sort of aircraft you could make it out, possibly 15 - 20 miles east of us, and no doubt in our minds it was part of the search party looking for us, but as I watched it in the binoculars, it turned and went directly away from us until you could not hear or see it any longer.

I decided that my partner would again head northeast to give us two chances of spotting a game of some sort, and I would keep on the track that I had set out and go into a fairly deep valley with a lot ofl-rounded hills in the bottom of the valley.I was still carrying Sherry in the backpack sometimes, and she was allowed to walk up these short hills as I had the sleeping bag and the insulated engine cover as part of my load.We got to the far side of the valley and were making our way to the top of this line of a hill.When we got to the top, I stopped, and we sat down to rest on the engine cover and sleeping bag. I glassed the area for the game and spotted my partner off about a mile and a half. He was walking, all bent over, and I thought he was in some sort of physical stress.He was difficult to spot because he had the white cloth of the wing covers wrapped around him, and I could only make out the brown stock of the rifle on his back.

Scanning the horizon for the possibility of seeing the search aircraft, I spotted a small herd of about50 Caribou along the top of the hill directly in front of my bent-over hunter; it was clear that he was stalking the caribou and that was the reason he was bent over and had the wing covers over his parka to help blend into white snow background.He was almost to the ridge, so I decided to head east in his direction, as the possibility of fresh raw caribou was likely going to be on the menu.

When we dropped into the next valley, I could not see the caribou, and I could not locate my partner, as he was either over the crown of the hill or had taken the rifle off his back.The hill was fairly steep, and Sherry had played out climbing it. I was carrying her in my arms as I did not take the time to put her in the backpack. I had the sleeping bag slung on my shoulder and the white canvas insulated engine cover over the top of my head, covering both of us partly.

When I broke the top of the hill, I went to put Sherry down to walk again.Theroar of the Single engineDe HavillandOtter was right above me, no more than 50 feet, and as it went away from me, I could see that the flaps were down and skis extended; it was going to land.With my chatty companyunderneath the engine cover, I had not heard the sound of the aircraft approaching.Sherry kept saying the caribou kept running away from him, and true, they were a good mile away from my partner going into the next valley.

We caught up to the now silent aircraft, threw our baggage in, put our daughter into my wife's arms, and climbed aboard the aircraft.The local trapper was sitting in the right seat of the aircraft as a spotter in front of the pilot, and he had spotted the caribou and then spotted my partner.Half an hour later, we were on the airport runway at Coppermine and back home, no worse for wear.I asked the pilot if he would consider landing out by my airplane with some fuel, and he told me, "No way, I have done enough ‘boondocking’ for this trip.They found your gas cap out on the ice strip, and you can take some gas out by ski doo without risking my airplane again.”

I guess what happened was that when the aircraft was sliding sideways and hit the crack and stopped immediately,the fuel in the tank surged to the filler end of the tank and blew the gas cap off the tank. The low pressure of the air over the top of the wing provides lift for the airplane, and it siphones the fuel out of the tank as we fly along.With both fuel lines going from the tank to the filter and then up to the other tank in the right wing, the fuel continued to siphon out of that tank as well.

The next day I went by ski doo with the other member with fuel.We followed the trapper's trail out west and stopped on the top of a hill where we saw the ski marks where the "Otter" had landed and glassed the area to the south.There, to my surprise, was the line of willows emblazoned with orange seismic tape beginning within 500 feet of the trail.That was how close I was to the trapper's trail when I turned east to head for my partner on the other hill.

The aircraft had landed on the trapper's trail, which was on high ground and packed from repeated use.We simply followed our well-marked trail to the valley with the lake, and there was the aircraft sitting by the end of the lake.The pilot said they had spotted the aircraft and then the line of seismic taped flags and had followed them until the trapper spotted the caribou and then my partner.I guess with the white canvas over the top of Sherry and me, I blended in the vast white of the tundra.With her continuous chatter and the insulated engine cover completely over my head, I could not hear the aircraft approach until it passed right over us.

We put the insulated engine cover over the cowling, and with the aid of my "Poor Man's Herman Nelson," I heated up the engine and battery with the fuel cap in place with full tanks.I took off and landed back on the ice strip in Coppermine.I had a meeting with everyone present at the next theatre film show we had at the hall.I addressed the problem of the thieves that had stolen my survival food out of my aircraft twice and the danger it represented when we did not have any food for two days.I would check my survival gear before every flight before take-off, and it was never tampered with after that for the next year and a half that I was at Coppermine.

Flight from Coppermine To Grande Prairie


With the thought of long-distance planning two years later, I had decided that our daughter would be going into Kindergarten in the fall, and I had witnessed how the local native kids had brutally abused other member’s children and did not want Sherry subjected to the black eyes and bruises, I applied for a transfer out of the North and wished to be posted to Alberta.It got approved, and we had been chosen to work in Grande Prairie, Alberta, on the 1st of July, 1971.

We took a flight out with the Police aircraft in May of 1971 for a “House Hunting Trip,”and there was only one house that was available for rent in all of Grande Prairie as it was really booming with the newly discovered oil field in the area. A meteorite had hit the roof, and it had not been repaired. It would only be rented if I agreed to pay to fix the roof, and most of the ceilings had to be replaced because of water damage.We found the best contractor in the community, picked out the house plan, and signed the papers to have them have the house ready for our occupancy by the last of July when we planned to be there to go to work. 

Back in Coppermine, I was working out plans to move my aircraft from there to our new home in Grande Prairie, and I checked with the pilots on the scheduled flight, and it appeared that I would have a few days of good weather over most of the North as well as Alberta as summer weather had arrived.I took off for the first 371 miles to Yellowknife.A member met me at the airport and he wondered if he could talk me into taking him over to Hay River to attend a member’s going away party that he had been stationed with for two years.I had planned on going around the Great Slave Lake instead of across the lake, but he said he would pay for gas as he could not drive there in time to attend the party, and he could get the “Buffalo Express” back to Yellowknife.I fueled up the aircraft and filed a revised flight plan, and we headed across the Great Bear Lake for Hay River. We continued climbing until we could make out the far shore of the lake, and it surprised me to see so much ice still on the lake.The distance from Yellowknife to Hay River is just 123 miles, and by road, it is 424 km.

 We landed and were met at the aircraft by members that I had been stationed with while I was in the Yukon, and I was invited to the party. I fueled the aircraft and closed my flight plan, and we went into Hay River, had supper, and went to the function.They had bought out what they had left at the Liquor Store in Hay River, and all they had was Meteus Rose’ sparkling wine.All it did for me was give me a horrible headache.I got a ride out to the airport in the morning and filed a flight plan for a stop in High Level, some 214 miles away, for fuel, and then my final destination would be Grande Prairie, another 239 miles further south.It was a smooth, easy flight because you really did not have to navigate; you just followed the dust cloud over the Mackenzie Highway.

I tried flying at 10,000 feet, but the effects of the Meteus returned, and I got cleared down to 5,000 feet before the effects of the alcohol were noticeable and flew around the heavy dust clouds that drifted off the highway.I landed at High Level, fueled up, and cut across the country headed for Grande Prairie. The number of roads and every field represented a nice, safe landing field, so it was a very relaxed flight.You did not have to be constantly aware of a possible landing site if the engine quit.

 I landed at Grande Prairie and tied down the aircraft and closed my flight plan. The Police Plane was on the prisoner escort patrol and had a stop in Peace River to drop the prisoners off for the Peace River Correctional Institute. And was returning to pick up prisoners at High Level, and six hours later, I was back in High Level.The members made arrangements that they would meet with the Highway Patrol out of Yellowknife, and I could act as an escort for a prisoner that was being returned to Yellowknife that they had picked up on a warrant.I took the scheduled flight back to Coppermine in the morning.

A week later, the Twin OtterPolice plane was picking us up for our transfer to Grande Prairie and loaded up our personal effects in the trunks that I had made.It was offloaded in Yellowknife, and I checked with Ottawa as I was concerned about the fact that they were planning on shipping it from Yellowknife to Grande Prairie by transport trucks. They assured me that the Government insurance would cover it, and I need not put insurance on our effects for theft or damage.Our family and I went by Commercial Airlines to Grande Prairie.When we arrived, we went to see the house we had arranged to be built. It was the same empty lot that we had chosen in May, and they had not been allowed to even dig the basement out until they could get compaction on the street in the crescent. It has rained for the past two months.The contractor said they would supply us with accommodation in a duplex that they rented until our house was ready to move into.As noted, everything was supplied in the North, and we went about buying everything to furnish our new house in this apartment. We needed all the appliances, furniture, beds, and our wardrobe for the hot summer.We bought a pickup and an Alaskan camper.

When we got our personal effects delivered from Transport Company we found most of it was ruined.They had hauled it over the Mackenzie highway in a trailer without air ride suspension and most of the Eskimo carvings that we had carefully packed, so a great number of them had chaffed the blankets, so they were ruined.I had a skill saw and gig saw in a metal box and it had been shaken so much that they were shaken all apart in the box.The small Hoover washing machine had the wheels and frame broken and up inside the damaged metal cabinet.

Ottawa advised me that I would have to have the damage appraised, and our personal clothing sheets and blankets would have to be weighed.When I got that notice, I became very suspicious of how the claim was going to be settled.I took the Eskimo carvings to Edmonton and had to pay $75.00 for the appraisal, which valued them at almost $10,000.00.I sent copies of the receipts for the new skill saw and gig saw that I replaced.Ottawa came back with the claim that they insurance company would only pay me three cents a pound, and it totaled $29.00 that I received for that transfer.


Halloween in Grande Prairie, 1971



I had the pleasure ofBig Mikein the North, and then when I came out of the North, he was the N.C.O. i/c Grande Prairie Detachment, and a story comes to mind that on Halloween, he was a typical hands-on kind of guy, and was out on patrol with the rest of us.When I was in Carcrossin the Yukon, I accompanied him and two other members to go to Anchorage to shoot a friendly competition against the Alaska State Police.We were going up the Alaska Highway, and this American vehicle would pass us and then stop to take pictures of goats, sheep, or moose on the roadside and then pass us again, and we had to eat their dust.This repeated for the next hundred miles. 

When we stopped at the border to stretch our legs and take a picture of the Welcome to Alaska sign, they were getting the firearms out of the trunk, and one guy was shouting, “It was good to be back in the land of the free,” and was strapping on his .44 Magnum revolver.He started to do repeated quick draws.On one of the pulls out of the holster, the revolver went off and cut a strip down the side of his leg.We managed to get the first aid box out of the trunk, and Big Mike patched him up and they were off to the hospital in Tok.When we got to Anchorage, I went into the bank to get some American money, and a chap walked in with two big pearl-handled pistols strapped on his waist.I looked at him as he stood in line behind me, and I saw Mike outside opening the trunk and, getting our revolvers and ammunition out and passing them onto the other members.They thought that it was going to be a bank robbery, and they were getting prepared to stop the culprit.I had been to the shoot in Fairbank the years before and knew that it was legal the pack a revolver if it was openly displayed. 

I was in charge of the Highway Patrol Unit and I arranged our shifts so that all six of us were working nights and patrolling the communities surrounding Grande Prairie to keep track of the revelers.I came back into Grande Prairie and Parked my car in the garage.I was walking on the main street, and I saw a group throwing eggs at the windows across the street. I ran after the guy in the light-colored jacket, and the other four ran into the parking lot with a lot of vehicles, and he headed right up the sidewalk ahead of me when I hollered, “Stop, Police,” he just sped up and in half a block I managed to over take him and grabbed his left arm, and we came to a stop.I asked him why he was throwing eggs and he said he did not throw any eggs.I asked him what are the names of the other guys that were throwing eggs,what are the names of your buddies then?

About that time, Mike came up to the both of us from across the street.He had been hit with one of the eggs on the left shoulder.Mike said that he had been hit with one of the eggs that you threw and was looking right down on this guy's face.This chap had a very light brown doe-skin jacket with four pockets on the front, and I had him by the one arm.Mike asked if he was throwing eggs, and he replied that he did not have any eggs.At that point, Mike patted him quite forcefully on the chest pockets and the lower pockets and said if you don’t have any eggs, then you had better bugger off.I let go of him, and he ran off into the darkness.Mike said, “That’s the bugger that threw the egg that hit me, and I am glad you were able to run faster than he could because I could not have caught him.”

I was in the office early the next morning, and this same chap came in and had his doe-skin jacket over his arm.I went to the front desk and introduced myself, and he said he wanted the Police to pay for his $400.00 jacket as it had been ruined by a big son of a bitch of a policeman.He was displaying the jacket with huge soiled areas below all four pockets and up the front about four inches above each pocket.I asked him, “Do you know which policeman it was that ruined the jacket,” “Last night, you told me that you did not have any eggs?”“That you and did not throw any eggs,”“That is why we let you go.”He said he did not know his name, but he was a really big son of a bitch.I said I was the one last night that you told me that you did not have any eggs and you did not throw and eggs, right?How did he ruin your jacket if you did not have any eggs and you did not throw any eggs? That was what you told the both of us last night.”

I asked him his name and wrote it down and told him that I was going to introduce him to the N.C.O. in charge, and he wouldtake a statement from you.I walked him into Mike’s office,introduced him, and said this is the chap that last night told us that he did not have any eggs and denied throwing eggs.Luckily Mike stayed seated and bothered to take his statement.I interjected that he had just told me that it was a big son of a bitch of a policeman that ruined his $400.00 jacket, and he did not know his name.Mike dutifully took a statement and said he would look into the matter further, and the chap left with his $400.00 jacket.

 Mike had a meeting with the father of this chap, and I heard nothing further of the matter as I understand that Mike took his brown serge jacket with him to the meeting that was all egg stained on the shoulder and all down the front, and I understand that dry cleaning took care of the egg mess on his jacket.I don’t believe that the doe-skin jacket could so easily have been cleaned or restored.



 

Dog Teams Vs. Ski-Doos



Most people are totally wrong about the reliability of dogs versus Ski-Doos. I never had a Ski-Doo run away and keep ahead of me if I fell off like a dog team had the dirty habit of doing. If you fell off the back of the sled or while running, you had a 20-foot rope with several big knots always dragging behind. When you were running, you had to keep getting off the back of the "lazy back" and jog to avoid freezing. You couldn’t stand on the back of the sled in a 15-20 mph wind when it was 20-30 degrees below zero, as you’d freeze to death. You only did this on a hard-packed trail; otherwise, you held the rope when running on a poorly broken trail. Often, you snowshoed to break the trail for the dogs, and then you had no trouble keeping warm. I still have my homemade trail snowshoes—they’re six feet long and seven inches wide.

The dogs learned left and right (haw and gee), which was reinforced by throwing a small chain (part of what you used to tie them out at night or when you were away from the team). You threw it out on the left if you wanted them to take the trail to the right. The word for "go" was simple: "Hut, hut, hut!" reinforced with the snap of a whip. If you missed the tug rope and fell, no matter how loud you hollered for them to stop—"Whoa, you SOB, whoa!"—they were smart enough to keep just ahead of you. They would sooner pull a sled without your weight.

It was a pretty critical moment because your food, shelter, and rifle were on the sled, and it carried a lot more significance when you were 50 miles from home. Your only hope sometimes was that they’d get tangled on the trail or startle a rabbit, moose, caribou, or deer, and the toboggan would get ensnared in the trees. Several times, I’ve had a five-mile or more run, with them just going fast enough to stay ahead of me.

One reason the RCMP got good mileage out of our dogs was that we cooked them a hot meal at the end of the day, so they went to bed with a belly full of warm food. Most of the Natives got 10-20 miles a day, while we covered 30-50, depending on trail conditions. It bothered me that the dogs had their supper prepared and fed before I could eat, but it shortened the time on the trail since they were cared for first.

I put memo after memo advocating that the RCMP get rid of the dogs and switch to snow machines. You had to feed the dogs year-round, and during the summer, you had to carry water to them every single day. The snow machine, on the other hand, could be put away for the summer. The dog food was never fully supplied for the 10 or 15 dogs we maintained. The RCMP had two breeding stations in the North: one at Arctic Red River and the other at Coppermine. They expected members to feed the dogs from local “land food,” like seals or fish since the RCMP supplied very little for them.

Having been the biggest advocate for switching to Ski-Doos, Ottawa eventually approved giving the dogs and equipment away to local trappers and hunters in Fort McPherson. They sent a Bombardier Ski-Doo and a big Evinrude machine with steel cleats across the tracks, reverse gear, and a weight double that of a Ski-Doo. We had a lot of open ice in the river and creeks in the area, and the Evinrude wouldn’t even pull itself up the riffles in the creeks. Most trails had portages with 10-foot banks out of the creeks, and you had to winch the machine up because it was too heavy to make a run to the top. Needless to say, the Ski-Doo won hands down.

When I was transferred from Fort McPherson to Coppermine, the Corporal ahead of us knew he was being transferred and didn’t do any sealing or fish gathering for the dogs. The Corporal, of course, took the day shift, and I took the night shift. We set six nets in the outflow of the Coppermine River and pulled the nets about every hour for two weeks. We double-iced them and hauled the fish to the dog food-insulated building. When we had several tons of fish stored away, we went to the office after picking up the mail. The first envelope we opened contained instructions to disperse the dogs and harnesses to the local trappers and hunters as two Ski-Doos were being shipped from Yellowknife.

I had a double-tracked Ski-Doo "Alpine" model of my own when I was at Watson Lake, and it was a go-anywhere machine in winter, great for climbing slopes in the mountains. I only had one mishap with it. I was going around the building with the idea that I could load it onto the trailer without partially lifting the heavy machine. I had backed the trailer into a snowbank at the edge of the driveway. The double-track Ski-Doo had a single ski in front and was quite broad to accommodate the double tracks. There was a power pole with a support cable near the driveway, and the snow was about three feet deep.

I was standing on the side panels, going full tilt, and swung wide to align with the trailer. I hadn’t considered that the cable angled down into the snow. Suddenly, the machine stopped immediately or even backed up, and I was airborne at about 20 mph, flying through the windshield. I landed on my back in the driveway, with the remains of the windshield in my parka pockets and the wind knocked out of me. I thought I had given the cable plenty of space, as I was to the right of where it went into the snow, but I hadn’t accounted for the downward angle. The machine had caught the right side of the frame in front. Other than a mark on the front bumper, it wasn’t damaged. My only injury was to my dignity in front of the onlookers.

I guess they wanted to get back at me for insisting on getting rid of the dogs. The first winter I was at Fort McPherson, they sent us two different machines: one Ski-Doo that weighed about 450 pounds and another 800-pound Evinrude, complete with electric start, twin cylinders, reverse gear, and metal bars across the tracks. On glaciered areas of creeks, we had to tow the Evinrude across smooth ice because it couldn’t pull itself, let alone a loaded toboggan, up any incline. If it buried itself in deep snow, the reverse only dug a deeper hole. That massive weight made it impossible to lift out of any predicament. So, we always had to carry a snow shovel, using it every time the machine floundered in the deep snow.

In the western Arctic, the snow never formed a crust because it never warmed enough to melt the surface. It remained light and fluffy until it was packed on the trails. In the central Arctic, however, the wind packed the snow like concrete into uneven drifts, making for an uncomfortable ride and limiting the speed you could travel. Many trails out in the bush followed rivers and creeks, and there were always portages with 20-30-foot banks you had to climb. It was impossible to get enough momentum with the heavy machine to scale the steep banks.

I suppose you can guess which machine I recommended for the Force to buy. The Ski-Doo, with its simple single-cylinder Rotax engine, was easy to maintain. All you had to do was remove the belt, gas line, wiring, springs, and four nuts to take out the engine, and you could carry it into the tent for servicing. On long trips, we’d service the engine daily by "de-carboning" the piston and cylinder head because the oil-gas fuel mixture of that era built up carbon, slowing engine RPM and performance. The other machine took a day to remove the engine and required an additional tent and stove to work on it. On top of that, it was too wide to fit through the doors of the workshop back home. The bearings on every wheel supporting the track needed constant greasing, or they’d fail.

The greatest change when using a snow machine in cold weather was the need for more layers of clothing. You couldn’t rely on physical exertion to stay warm. Wind pants, down-filled parkas, gauntlets, mukluks—you had to be prepared to keep warm with minimal movement.

In all honesty, I have to admit one Ski-Doo did get away fromme once. It brings to mind an event where I was helping the boys at Coppermine assemble and service their Ski-Doos. Two machines came in that were scheduled for Baker Lake. I was asked to go there to assemble them, as the aircraft had a couple of hours of flight time left and would return to Coppermine. We got one assembled, and I told the guy not to start it until we had the box underneath the frame at the back to align the track.

It was mid-winter, and we were assembling the Ski-Doos in the heated garage. We pushed one outside, and while I lifted the back, my partner placed the box underneath. He put his knee on the seat and started the engine. Unfortunately, when he pulled on the throttle, the cable leading to the carburetor stuck, causing the engine to rev at full throttle. The cable had frozen from condensation—it had been in the warmth of the aircraft and then in the garage, but when we moved it outside into the -30°F temperature, it froze.

When he shifted his weight on one of the side panels to get off, the machine slid off the box and immediately took off across the yard, heading down Baker Lake at full speed. We could see the red taillight bouncing over the drifts until it disappeared out of sight.

Panic set in, and we rushed to get the second machine ready so we could chase the runaway. The first Ski-Doo didn’t have a full tank of gas, so we figured it would stop before reaching the trees on the south end of the lake. We got the second one outside and began aligning the track. We kept the hood up to manually adjust the throttle in case it got stuck again. My partner was putting on his cold-weather gear, preparing to head out and look for the lost machine.

Just as he was ready, we saw a headlight a couple of miles away, bobbing and weaving over the drifts, coming toward us. As it got closer, we realized it was the same Ski-Doo—without a driver. Somehow, it had turned around on its own and was heading back toward us. Amazingly, it made its way to within 10 feet of where it had taken off before crashing partway through the garage wall and coming to rest, idling.

It was astonishing how the machine had managed to turn around and return almost to its starting point. The only damage was a bent bumper, slightly bent skis, and a few scratches on the cowling. We straightened the skis, checked the throttle to make sure it didn’t stick, and everything was good to go. By the time the plane arrived back, both Ski-Doos were running fine, and the crew was already enjoying rides around the settlement.

The longest trip I ever made on a Ski-Doo was 285 miles one way, from Coppermine to a small lake near Contwoyto Lake. We used snow machines daily to respond to complaints, patrol the settlement, and sometimes search for overdue hunters, trappers, and prospectors. After I left the North and was stationed in Grande Prairie, my neighbor invited me to try out his new Ski-Doo. He couldn’t understand why I wasn’t eager to ride—after spending so much time in the North, the novelty had worn off.

In the North, I had installed kill switches on our machines—a simple loop around your mitten attached to a cotter pin that connected to the ignition. If your left hand left the handlebar or the cotter pin was pulled, the machine would stop immediately. This was helpful when transporting drunk individuals from the upper end of the settlement—if you had to get off the machine to deal with them, it would automatically stop. It also served as an anti-theft measure. Even if someone found the key in the ignition, without the correct cotter pin, the machine wouldn’t start. And if you fell off, the Ski-Doo wouldn’t get far before stopping and waiting for you.

In the Western Arctic, many trails had vertical climbs off riverbanks or lake shores. You’d often need to bail off and let the machine, free of your weight, use its momentum to make the climb. You’d first make a few passes to ensure your bail-off point wasn’t crusted over or drifted with snow. Once the machine made it to the top, we would drop the toboggan, use a sturdy rope, and pull the loaded sled up the incline.

The local Natives appreciated when we patrolled using snow machines because we would clear branches and fallen trees along the trails. While they would usually crouch behind the "lazy back" of their sleds and hope for the best, this often led to injuries. A sled ahead would break off a branch, leaving a sharp point, and the next person in line would get stabbed by it. We made aneffort to clear the trails, not just for our protection but to prevent further injury and preserve our fragile windshields, which were easily damaged in the extreme cold. Though it took time and effort, clearing the trail paid off on return trips and lasted for several years.

 

My Help Building of Our House



My father got into an argument with my grandfather because he had turned the farm over to him and my mother. He had not stopped working on the railroad and came home, taking the horses to a local plowing match. He spent the prize money the horses had won on whiskey. Frustrated, he suggested that they should move the ever-growing family out, and he took the farm back from them. My father then bought the first house available, which was being sold for back taxes by the County of Tay. It was a three-room tarpaper shack with no basement or foundation located on about four acres, a mile and a half outside the town of Coldwater, Ontario. Since he was often living away with the railroad signal gang, it didn’t seem to matter to him what kind of conditions his family lived in.

Living with my grandparents in a six-bedroom brick house with all the amenities was comfortable, especially as much of the food came from the farm and gardens. This setup meant my father had very little cost to feed the family of four kids—three boys and a girl—allowing him to save more money for his drinking habit.

I remember that first winter vividly. The new house was impossible to heat. It only had a large kitchen stove, which my mother andI had to attend to regularly at night. I was tasked with cutting and splitting wood for the fire. The neighbors, who owned a couple hundred acres of bush and fields, allowed me to cut dead trees on their property. Despite my efforts, the house remained unbearably cold.

One weekend, when my father was home, he quickly realized how primitive the house was. He hadn’t chopped any wood for the night, so he borrowed a few rails from the fence at the back of the property in the dark to burn for warmth. It became clear that his contribution to raising the family was severely lacking. Realizing that the shack was unsuitable for his family, he decided that, because he was away so often with the Canadian Pacific Railroad (CPR) signal gang, he would hire a contractor to build a proper home for us. Before leaving for work again, he arranged a loan from the bank and hired a contractor to begin building in 1951.

During the construction, my grandfather on my mother’s side volunteered his horse and dirt scoop to dig the basement. The horse dragged the scoop, and the man operating it controlled the amount of dirt it picked up by adjusting the angle of the scoop with the two long handles at the back. The scoop was about five feet long and three feet wide, capable of holding around a foot and a half of soil when full. The horse, well-trained from years of digging basements, walked up the slope, turned around at the top of the pile, and returned to the basement hole for the next load.

One day, my grandfather asked if I wanted to try operating the scoop. I managed to haul several small loads of dirt up the pile. However, on one trip, I hit a large embedded rock. Encouraged by my grandfather to dig deeper, I urged the horse on, but the scoop caught the rock. Suddenly, I found myself airborne, landing on the horse’s neck, tangled in the collar and harness. The horse, startled, bolted over the dirt pile with me in tow. I eventually fell off and ended up in the scoop while the horse ran toward the back of the property, stopping only at the cedar rail fence. After that, I had had enough of basement digging. The rock that caused the commotion was nearly three feet in diameter and had to be dug out by hand and towed out with a chain.

Next, my grandfather dug a ditch from one corner of the basement to provide drainage. A pipe was installed to run underneath the footings for the walls. The contractor poured the footings and started laying cement blocks for the walls. My job was to haul the blocks from the truck to the work area using a wheelbarrow and sometimes carrying them by hand. As the walls went up, the horse was used to dump and pack soil around the foundation on all four sides.

I helped mix cement for the basement floor and mortar for the blocks. They installed a cistern in one corner of the basement and a basement entry in another. The main floor went up quickly, and the walls were framed and sheathed with six-inch boards inside and out. Sawdust and shavings from the local planning mill were used as insulation, packed between the vertical wall studs. I was responsible for filling a bag with sawdust and carrying it to the walls as they were built. To prevent pests, the workers dusted the sawdust with lime every few feet as they filled the walls. Once the walls reached the eight-foot level, the partitions were installed, and stairs were built leading to the basement and the second floor.

The layout of the house consisted of a front door, a back door, and a hallway that passed by the stairs leading to the back bedrooms. The kitchen and living room were at the front of the house. There were two bedrooms on either side of the hallway. The contractors also built brick chimneys for stoves in the basement and kitchen, and I helped by hauling bricks and mortar. On the second floor, the exterior walls were four feet high, and the same sawdust insulation was packed between the studs, but there was no insulation in the upper sections or the ceiling.

After the roof trusses were assembled on the ground, I helped the contractors lift them through the window openings to the roof. Meanwhile, my grandfather used the horse to spread the remaining soil around the yard, sloping it away from the house for drainage. The old tarpaper shack was sold to a neighbor, who jacked it up, placed it on two large trees used as skids, and, with two tractors, hauled it a quarter mile down the road to a new foundation.

Once the roof was boarded and shingled, they installed gutters, channeling rainwater to the cistern in the basement. They finished the rooms on the first floor with gyprock, painted them, and installed windows and doors. Everything was nearing completion when my father returned from working on the railroad, bringing the loan money with him. In a drunken state, he picked a fight with the contractors, accusing them of overcharging for insulating the roof and finishing the upstairs. The argument escalated, and he ran them off the property.

Thus, the finishing work was left incomplete, with much of the upstairs left uninsulated.He refused to pay them anymore, and they walked off the job, never returning.

The upstairs area remained unfinished and uninsulated until I completed it after his death in 1975. It stayed that way for over 33 years. I remember having to sleep with three layers of blankets in the winter, seeing my breath inside the house, and in summer, it was unbearably hot. Water would drip off the roofing nails after they frosted over during the night, only to melt when the sun hit the roof. There was no proper heat distribution from the basement to the first floor or from the main floor to the second floor other than leaving the door open at the bottom of the stairs, which blocked the hallway to the bedrooms.

In 1969, when I was working as a "powder monkey," loading drilled holes in the granite rocks on the Highway 400 extension to Highway 69, I was granted a “powder monkey” license and was able to purchase dynamite from the local hardware store. I dug a well by punching a hole in the center with a crowbar and placing a quarter of a stick of dynamite inside. When the charge went off, it blew most of the hard soil out, and I only had to dig and clear a little around the edges. This process continued with increasing portions of dynamite until I reached 20 feet down and hit an aquifer, filling the well with seven feet of water. I then hired a tow truck to lower four-foot cement culverts into the well. After placing four of them, my father came home from the legion, drunk, and picked a fight with the tow truck operator, who promptly left. I ended up rolling the last ring of cement into the well by myself, using planks.

My father had spent much of his life “witching for wells” in the surrounding district, believing that without his involvement, the water wouldn’t be drinkable. Since he hadn’t been part of the well's construction, he refused to use it. Instead, he covered it with railroad ties, and for 41 years, the family continued to haul water from the farm well across the road. There was a five-gallon pail under the sink, which we dumped outside. When I went back home for his funeral, I dug the ditch, piped the water into the house, and installed a pressure system and pump. I also did the plumbing and installed a toilet, tub, and shower.

At the time, I was living in Grande Prairie, Alberta, and my mother and brother were still in the house. I couldn’t stand them continuing to live in such poor conditions. So, working 20 hours a day for six days straight, I installed a bathroom, switched the power from 110 to 220 volts, bought an electric stove, installed new cabinets, insulated the roof, and laid out four rooms upstairs. I also bought an oil tank, installed a furnace, and removed the kitchen stove. I installed a grill for heat distribution from the furnace and arranged for a septic field to be put in. For 24 years, they had endured an outhouse for bathroom facilities. The frustrating part was that my father had helped move a toilet from his younger brother’s place next door when their mother had a septic system installed. Rather than dig a proper hole, he placed the outhouse over the only old well on the property.

When settling his estate, he had only $87 in his bank account, and I had to cover his funeral expenses. In 1953, he got a job as a signal maintainer at Medonte Station, which was closer to home and eliminated his travel. Unfortunately, the legion was always on his way home, which only worsened his alcoholism, leaving no money for upgrading the house. Enduring an upbringing with both parents as alcoholics, I made a pact with myself that my children would never see me drunk. Now, my daughter is 57, and my son is 55, and they have never seen me under the influence of alcohol.

The first time I came home to visit while working in Newfoundland, I had been involved in protecting the Paper Mill property when the Teamsters Union tried to unionize the workers. We had to guard the dams built to control water levels. When they cut down trees and floated them in the lake, the logs were sent downriver to the pulp mill. One evening, during my shift, I noticed an aircraft landing at the far end of the lake and assumed it was a fishing party. A canoe appeared in the center of the lake, which I also dismissed as a fishing group.

As it grew dark, I was patrolling the river side of the dam when suddenly, there was a massive orange flash and a loud explosion above me. A portion of the dam, about 20 feet from the top, gave way. The aircraft had delivered a torpedo. I was swept away by a wall of water. There were no trees along the riverbanks for a couple of miles, and every time the river dropped, I was submerged in boiling water and hit the bottom. Fortunately, being a strong swimmer, I managed to grab onto a tree branch and pull myself out about eight miles downstream. In the dark, I made my way back to the dam, but I was on the wrong side of the camp and the road.

The explosion had left a hole in the dam 20 feet from the top, and much of the wooden structure had been swept away by the force of the water. I crossed the shaky remains of the walkway only to find that my partner and our vehicle were gone. He had waited for me for over an hour before leaving, assuming I had perished. He had only suffered hearing loss from the explosion, as he had been crossing the top of the dam when the blast knocked him ten feet down into the trees.

Later, I was assigned to protect the mill property on the midnight shift. Around 1:00 a.m., someone threw a four-foot cord of wood from the darkness, striking a member of the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary on the head, killing him instantly. There were over 100 people on the picket line across the chain-link fence, but no one admitted to throwing the wood or seeing who did it.

After this, I took my holiday and returned home, only to find my father hosting a drinking party with five railroad workers. They were celebrating an upcoming strike, demanding a four-cent hourly wage increase. They showed me their voting ballots, saying all they needed to do was turn them in for Monday’s strike vote. I asked to see their ballots to check if the numbers were unique. When they handed them over, I burned all six ballots in the stove, telling them I now knew where six votes were missing. The strike vote would claim 100% approval, but we knew that wasn’t true. The strike lasted a month, and they settled for a three-cent raise. I sent my father a letter, reminding him he’d have to work another 11 years to make up for the lost wages. He was always seen with a "roll-your-own" cigarette hanging from his mouth, even after undergoing cancer operations on his lips and throat. He eventually died from lung cancer, still smoking until the last time I saw him. He was a slow learner.

Here is a picture of one of the five cairns that I built on the location where the five members of the "Lost Patrol" died.I made cairns similar to this one on the site where they died.I was able to locate the sites with the help of the localswhowere involved in the local search for their bodies. The ashes of their campfires were still evident.I cut down trees to make the cairns to make an opening to the chairs visible from the fiver and made routed out details of their death;regimental numbs, and dates of their death on the framed wooden planks.


Injury Accident in 1973 near Hythe, Alberta



We had a report of a bog burning about five miles north of Hythe, Alberta and the Beaverlodge Detachment requested assistance from the Grande Prairie Highway Patrol to assist in controlling traffic through the area.They had more than 40 cars and trucks that were in the ditch about a quarter of a mile from the fire.The major concern was a semi-trailer of propane that was overturned in the ditch in that smoky area.There was little or no wind, and the visibility was zero for over a mile. I responded there shortly after 6:00 p.m. and took the north end of the smoky area.We would usually pick a truck to lead the way through the smoke so they could look down through the smoke and follow the centre line through the curved section of the highway, and a number of cars and pickups would be allowed to follow.We had one wrecker that the driver had oxygen equipment that would follow the flow of one-way traffic and he would pull one of the vehicles out of the ditch and tow it to the end of the smoke.When he got to the end of the smoke, then a reversal of the flow of traffic would be repeated, and he would haul another vehicle out of the ditch.They arranged to borrow the oxygen tanks from the Hospital in Hythe to keep the tow truck driver supplied with oxygen.

At about eleven o’clock, a chap approached me. He was a victim of an impaired driver whohad run intohim and his vehicle, and the court case was pending in a few days.He had hitch-hiked down from Whitehorse to give evidence at the trial that was one of my files.I invited him to sit in the Police car, and I would be relieved at midnight, and I would give him a ride to Grande Prairie.I had used up all of my flares and was sitting with the emergency lights going on the side of the highway.I had a big line of vehicles stopped, and as another vehicle approached, I would move forward and explain to the next vehicle how we were handling the traffic and advise that we still had about 20 vehicles still in the ditch and the danger of the propane tanker overturned in the ditch.

The next vehicle that came along was a cattle truck hauler.It stopped, and I got up on the side of the truck and explained the routine ofhow we were handling the flow of traffic.I got down from the side of the truck and, went to the back of his vehicle and inspected the lights on the rear of the truck.I got back up and explained to him that when the traffic northbound came through and to wait for the tow truck with a vehicle attached, then he could lead the flow of traffic through the smoke and follow the centre line on the highway.The truck, obviously, and a vacuum assist on the clutch and brakes as he was grinding gears.I noticed that there was another set of headlights coming a good four or five miles up the highway.I got back up on the side of the highway and told him to take his foot off the brake and wait a few minutes for the compressor to catch up, and just as I stepped down, I was struck by the front of a cab over a semi-trailer.I was looking at the side of the headlight right at my face and going down the ice-covered highway.

The trucker had slowed to what he called the double nickels (55 MPH) when he saw the emergency lights of the police car,the brake lights ahead of him, and then just tail lights;he continued at his double nickels speed until he realized the vehicle ahead was stopped.He braked and managed to steer his truck past the back of the truck, but his loaded semi-trailer went into the back left corner of the truck and sent it off into the ditch.I was knocked about ten feet forward and was sliding along on the icy surface and then fell down, and I could see the right front wheel coming towards me, and I kicked at it, and it ran over my feet, and I grabbed at the tire as I knew the same wheels were coming up and the tire caught my sand brown belt and stuffed me up into the fender well and I was looking at the back of the headlight.I was covered with diesel fuel as the back of the cattle truck hit the fuel tanks and burst the tank on the right side of the semi.I was still conscious and the trucker was standing at the front of thetruck.

Whenever someone would come back to see what had happened, he would say that I ran over the poor son of a bitch of a policeman, and they would go off looking in the ditch, and the next stopped driver would arrive, and he would repeat the same dialogue.He must repeat that a dozen times.I had got my wind back and was struggling, trying to get back off the top of the tire and slightly jammed into the wheel well.The truck had been shut off but I had trouble with the hot manifold burning my lower leg and finally got wiggled back out.My flashlight and hat wereon the highway by the side of the truck.I obviously was in shock, and I retrievedthem and put my hat on my head, and went to the front of the truck, and the driver said to me, “I drove over the poor son of a bitch”.I said that “I was the poor son of a bitch that you run over, and I did not appreciate challenging my mother’s marriage.” 

I went to the police car and had my passenger get in the driver’s seat;I got into the passenger seat, got on the radio, and advised that I was struck by the semi-trailer and needed some medical treatment and would go to the hospital in Hythe for treatment and the relief person could take my position on the north end and to follow the tow truck through the smoke.When the member arrived, we led the procession through the smoke, and I continued on to the Hythe hospital as I was leaking from several cuts and wounds.

The doctor asked me if I had been fighting with a grizzly bear and lost, and I told him it was a cab over Kenworth that I was fighting and lost that round.Hedid some ex-rays on my feet and ankles and thought he could see a few cracked bones on my toes and both my feet, and totalled nearly 100 sutures and treated the burns where my socks were, and the diesel oil had heated and burned the skin a little from the white-hot manifold that I touched when wiggling trying to get out of the fender well.I talked to the doctor a lot to get him to agree to let me go to the Grande Prairie Hospital,as I was going to Grande Prairie in a Police car with radio communication, and he finally agreed.

When I got to the Detachment, the dumb Sgt insisted that I go into the office and advise Peace River of being involved in an accident, which I did on crutches.We then drove to my witness's parents' place and dropped him off, and as It was near my residence, I decided to drop off my duty belt and revolver and change out of the blood-stained uniform.My wife was asleep, and when she woke, she wanted to know why I was taking off my uniform as I thought you had to work until 4:00 a.m.I told her that I had been hit by a truck and was going to change and go the Grande Prairie Hospital if I could get my pants off and another uniform back on.She helped me with both, and I related what happened and that I already had been checked out with a doctor and patched up pretty good at the Hythe Hospital.I drove to the hospital and took the x-ray plates inwith me.

The doctors examined them and told me that they had no room available at the hospital and they could only put me up with a bed in the hallway.He asked ifI had an easy chair at home, and I responded in the positive.He said he would confine me to that chair for a week and, if I could feel any pains worsening, then call an ambulance and come back to the hospital in case some of my internal organs got damaged.I advised the office that the Police car was at my residence and that there wereno rooms available at the Hospital, and I was sent home by a doctor.Eleven days later, I went back to work.



 

Some of the Odd Stories



When I joined the RCMP in 1961, I underwent the horse riding routine that involved all the maneuvers carried out by the Musical Ride. We did this by commands from the instructor, where the Musical Ride changed patterns on the command of the right marker and the flash of the staff. This was before 1970, when the equitation program ended, except for those training for the Musical Ride in Ottawa. It was one of the more physical parts of the training. You got up at 5:30 a.m., went to the stables, and cleaned the stables for 75 horses and two stallions in their own compound. After that, you changed your clothes, went for breakfast, and then "on parade" by 8:30, followed by classes or physical training.

We had 123 subjects, 93 of which covered police work, typing, sections of the Criminal Code, and some federal statutes. The remaining subjects were physical, such as swimming, equitation, shooting, police holds, photography, pursuit driving, boxing, water rescue, marching, physical education (which involved running in steps for miles), and foot drills. I believe that had they printed up two days of the syllabus, I would have purchased it to get out because you were tired all the time, and it seemed you were forever drawing extra duties for the simplest of reasons.

I played the bugle and drums when I was in the Army Cadets in high school, and I was chosen with four other guys in our troop to perform the lowering of the flag ceremony for the tourists. We all had to dress in boots, breeches, red tunics, Stetson hats, and full Sam Browne belts. We marched up and down the parade square until the sun was about to hit the horizon. We would then march over to the flagpole at the side of the parade square, lower the flag while the “Last Post” was played with the bugle, and fold the flag. Afterward, we would march off to the barracks. That was not where it ended, as this went on all summer. We had to return, get out of uniform, and clean and polish our boots. In the summer, the sun did not go down until after 10:00 p.m. Some clown who never marched with a kettle drum decided that we needed more practice, so a few more hours of practice with the bugle were ordered. I have never attempted to play the bugle or drums since that session of flag lowering.

When we began training, there were 18 troops of 32 members each at Depot, and it took a couple of weeks for all of our troops to assemble. The three members from Quebec were the last to arrive. Jacques came from the east side of Hudson Bay in a little fishing village and had never seen a car or truck before landing in Montreal. You had to have a driver’s license to join the RCMP, so the Post Office issued him one. I had worked welding on the Trans-Canada Pipeline and was used to receiving a paycheck each week we worked. When we received our first paycheck, I initially thought it was not too bad for a week’s work, only to realize it was for six weeks’ pay. At the time, our yearly salary was $2,600.00, and you could work as many hours as you could stand.

During driver training, I was the only one in the troop with a car (a 1959 Triumph TR-3), and I had to teach Jacques how to drive. He is the only person I know who could get the front wheels off the ground with a six-cylinder shift-on-the-wheel Ford. His comprehension of the gear, gas, and clutch seemed to be beyond his coordination ability. When it came to pursuit driving, the instructor wouldn’t even ride with him. Jacques’s father sent him money to buy a car, and a few weeks later, while attending court in downtown Regina to familiarize us with how the court operated, Jacques’s name was called. He walked to the front, pleaded guilty to doing 90 miles an hour down Dewdney Avenue in Regina, and paid the fine.

When women joined the force in 1975, they could not be asked to clean the stables and groom the horses, so the program was shelved. The horses were sold or returned to their owners, who avoided the expenses of maintaining a horse for two years and could sell it for more bragging rights thanit had RCMP training. The stables became classrooms for simulated crime scenes and role-playing solving domestic disputes.

If you were scheduled for equitation, it meant a half-day of riding. You had to go the night before and clean and saddle soap all of your horse's tack. If it was an afternoon ride, you did not have to clean the tack. We rode English-style saddles that were like a second skin on the horse, with stirrups attached and double reins. When we began training, the instructor for equitation gave us all a peanut to put between our knees to see if we could crack it. By the time we finished equitation, our grip on the saddle was such that you could crack a walnut. All changes of direction and changes of lead (which foot the horse moves forward to change direction for a turn) were signaled to the horse by knee pressure so they could change the lead foot into the intended turn. This is what made it look as if the entire formation was flowing into turns.

Every horse knew how to empty the saddle, and there was no pommel to grab like on a Western saddle, so your knee grip was the only thing that saved you from a very unceremonial trip to the dirt of the riding school, which was covered in sawdust, horse shit, and piss. The walls of the riding school were sloped from the top down, with a wide portion at the bottom, so they could not rub their legs as they went around the riding school. A lot of the horses could bite and kick, so you always had to be on guard when handling them and not in the saddle. We had to brush and groom every horse in the stable, and many of them had the dirty habit of stepping on their feet, so you had to learn what signaled their intentions before the horse buggered up the spit shine on your ankle boots.

Grooming the stallions that were housed in a separate stable was a really dangerous job as they had to be cross-tied so they could not get at you to bite, and they had the foot-stepping down to a science as they were always restless and always moving, so you could not anticipate their moves. One morning, we were grooming the stallions, and my partner had not tied the knot tight enough on one side. The horse reached around and grabbed him just above the belt and below the ribs, physically throwing him over the six-foot metal stall. For months, he was every color of the rainbow along his side, with his shirt and fatigue jacket preventing the teeth from breaking the skin.

We played a game in the riding arena with the horses, pushing a big, inflated seven-foot ball. Some horses really enjoyed it, while some didn’t, and others were deathly afraid of the ball. It was a test of the rider to see how well they could encourage their horse to push the ball to the other end of the arena. That day, I had a horse called “Rouge,” the biggest and, no doubt, the strongest horse we had. He had four wooden legs and was the roughest riding horse in the stable. He got behind the ball, pushing it to the other end of the arena. Another member had his skittish horse trying to back up as fast as this big ball came towards it, and it wheeled around and headed for the other end of the arena at full gallop. The outside door was open, with just the sloped interior wall a good seven feet high. The horse sped up to make the jump, and the member stayed in the saddle. You could hear the clatter of the shooed horse on the four-inch squares of cement, then silence. They opened the sloped portion, and neither the horse nor the rider was at the end of the stables. We found them out in the back pasture, with the horse covered in froth and the member still in the saddle. The horse was excused from any further push-ball exercises.

During my training, the troubles with the Doukhobor sect in central BC erupted, with schools being burned, power stations being blown up, and 300-pound naked ladies lying down on the streets in protest. It was decided that our troop would be trained for riot control on horseback, hoping that the sight of 32 horses coming down the street would prompt the naked protesters to seek shelter. For a month, we practiced all sorts of riot formations, fought off troops of members, and endured tear gas and rifle blanks being shot off in the riding school. The tear gas did not affect the horses, but it was most unpleasant to ride around inside the riding school when it was dispersed. We loaded up the horses on the train in the middle of the night twice, but no one in Ottawa had the balls to send us into BC. I was in training for eleven months, so you can imagine how much the training has been reduced when they are putting recruits out in the field in six months, only to the larger detachments for "Recruit Field Training."

Western saddles prevent signaling because the saddle is built up from a wooden "tree" and heavy leather that you sit in, directing with reins and shift of weight. There are three different dressage ways of making the horse learn to work with you: the right way, the wrong way, and then the RCMP way, which we learned, all involving disciplined enforcement by the rider. If you did not perform the maneuver correctly, it was no fun doing 25 push-ups in the riding school with your nose in the horseshit.

After I retired, I went to work for Mega-Tech, initially to train the smaller police departments and bylaw members so they could use the instruments properly and give evidence in court. When we sold their department a radar or laser, we would train all of their members and offer the training to other departments in their area because the RCMP did not go out of their way to train other agencies when they had a course taking place in their area. I began selling all sorts of police equipment, including strobes and the then-new LED lights. I also taught anyone taking the laser course how to use lasers for accident investigation and measuring crime scenes. I patented that course and was paid to give it as far south as Dayton, Ohio. I had prepared manuals of instructions when I was still in the force and had the foresight to have them copyrighted when I was doing the same job of teaching courses while still in the force.

I believe my course became the standard for instruction throughout the force. About six months after I retired, I received a summons to appear in court for infringement of patent laws. The chap in charge of the collision analyst program had collected one of my laser course manuals, which I had given to an RCMP member who attended. He claimed it was identical to the RCMP manuals. When he finished his list of offenses, I approached the court while he was still on the stand and handed the judge three sealed, patented copies of the manual that I had made while with the RCMP. I gave the judge exact copies contained in the sealed, patented envelopes and asked him to compare them with the one presented by the witness. The judge reprimanded the witness for wasting the court's time. My only consolation was that the witness retired a short time later.

I went to the Chicago Institute of Technology and became a collision analyst. For seven years, I went to every fatal and serious motor vehicle accident in the central portion of Alberta. I continued to fight with Ottawa to recover a portion of my expenses, but I got no support from the member in charge of the local program.

Another collision analyst and I did a lot of work on the examination of headlights, taillight bulbs, and brake light bulbs to see if, by microscopic examination, we could determine if they were working or not working when the accident occurred. We had gone to the local car scrapyard and collected bulbs from vehicles that had been involved in accidents, creating an inventory of broken and live bulbs. I then designed and built a vertical ramp with a 20-foot plank, a slide, and a place to mount the light sockets and wires that ran down to our battery. The bulbs were placed in the element and dropped, and the filament distortion was then examined to see if they were operating or not operating. After doing this a hundred times, we ran out of money to buy more bulbs and exhausted our supply from the wrecking yards. By dropping them from different heights, we could determine the amount of force being applied to cause that amount of distortion of the filaments on the different varieties and sizes of bulbs. We took a lot of pictures and submitted a report for the information of other members of the program, but we never got any credit for our time and effort.

I investigated one accident at Sherwood Park where a kid on a bicycle made a circle out onto the highway in front of oncoming cars, not realizing how fast the car was traveling, and was struck and killed. I did the shadow and skid mark measurements and came up with a speed of 170 MPH. The sergeant in charge of the collision analyst program came to the scene the next day, and the shadow marks had disappeared even though I had painted them in. His measurements did not match mine, and he accused me of exaggerating the speed and removed me from the program. About six months later, the girl driving the car came to the Sherwood Park Detachment, and I took her statement. She said her brother’s drinking buddy had been fondling her, and she wanted to get rid of the drunken nuisance by getting to Edmonton as fast as she could. She had put her foot down on the accelerator, and the car was going as fast as it could when the accident happened. Her Aboriginal brother was in the back seat, passed out, and woke up when the accident happened. He had told her repeatedly not to say anything to the police. I took the statement to the sergeant in "K" Division headquarters, and he read it, then just got up, put on his coat, and went home. I retired shortly after that and went to work for Mega-Tech, teaching radar, and laser courses wherever we sold a set.

I was invited back to "Depot" Training facilities in Regina and trained the instructors. Of course, we sold them radar and laser, and my courses were used to ensure the recruits came out of training knowing how to use speed-measuring equipment. When I was at “Depot” Division Training Centre, it saddened me to see how the physical training had been reduced and boxing eliminated, as well as swimming, water rescue, and first aid reduced. I knew how often these skills had helped me in dealing with day-to-day police work during my 33 years of active police duties. The women could not be sworn at, did weight training with just the bar and no weights, and did not have to do push-ups or chin-ups in training. Their police hold would be of no value when they got field experience and had to realize that they could never afford to lose a fight when dealing with real-life police work in the field.

I was also fortunate when I went north to the Yukon to spend three weeks in Edmonton, going to different hospitals and learning diagnostic medicine (pulling teeth, suturing, giving medication for different maladies, and diagnosing TB and appendicitis). This involved the local members being the local medical practitioners. It ended when a member performed a successful appendix operation with a doctor on the Single Side Band Radio in Yellowknife, directing his every move. It happened during spring break-up at a northern detachment when they could not get an aircraft into a northern settlement to evacuate the patient. Ottawa even took away the big medicine chests that were at every small detachment in the North that did not have a nursing station. That was a real relief because every month, you had to go through the medicine chest, and two of us had to count each and every pill of the narcotics and certify their presence with another member present, then delete the numbers that had been administered, to whom, when, and why. The record-keeping was a real pain. There were a lot of settlements that did not have a nursing station or any doctors in the area, and the RCMP was the only medical service equipped and source of drugs in the entire area.

I went ahead with first aid courses to different levels to satisfy the Yukon Game and Fish Department and obtained a guide's license for the Yukon Territory. This was prompted when a Staff Sergeant retired and took over the department, and he was intent on making hunting big game in the Yukon a world-class hunt so he could get some of the natives involved in guiding and outfitting. There was only one big game-guiding service at that time, and he was booked for years ahead. He sent invitations to all the sports magazine editors in the U.S. and Europe, inviting them to a guided hunt and mentioning Dall sheep, goats, moose, elk, caribou, grizzly bears, black bears, wolves, and wolverine. It was offered as a walking hunt as he had no horses available and just had a few tents and camping equipment available from the Forestry Department. He approached a number of members to see if we would be interested in helping out and volunteering to support his project.

I took my holidays and guided Fred Bear, the president of the Bear Bow Company, to a record Dall sheep that still is the top sheep in Pope and Young scoring records. When he offered me a bunch of cash, I told him that I was a member of the RCMP and could not take any money. I had packed the head, hide, and hindquarters, and he had packed his bow and front quarters off the mountain. A day later, I got a call from the airport saying there was a package there for me. When I went to pick it up, he had left all his arrows, bow, and all of his camouflaged gear, including his footwear, with a note that said, “You now have the best bow in the North American Continent.” He wrote that it was the best hunt he had ever been on. I guided the owner of Field and Stream magazine to a big moose within about ten miles of Whitehorse, and he shot one of the really big black bears at the Whitehorse dump. He was really pleased with it because it had a big white “V” on the chest. He planned on a big full head mount to display the white on the chest. I helped in doing the skinning to best accommodate the planned mounting. We were able to retrieve the moose with a tow truck, and he donated the meat and hide to the local natives living in Whitehorse.

I had access to a Piper “SuperCub” aircraft and did a lot of flying, taking pictures of games in the area, so I knew where a lot of different wild games were located at that time. It was not difficult to know where they were hanging out; it was just deciding the shortest and easiest way to get to where they were and advising some of the other volunteer guides on where their game could be located. It turned out to be a real success story because presently, there are 20 outfitters in the Yukon, and the entire area is divided up. They promote hunting throughthe variety of game in their area, and there are presently in excess of two hundred guides, most of them natives to the area, representing a lot of money coming into the area.

I knew the only outfitter and made a deal with him that I would take charge of bringing out his string of horses and camp at the end of the hunting season if I could use his outfit to guide my father and a good friend to a hunt of their lifetime on the way out. My father went hunting every year back in Ontario, and it was more of a drunken vacation, but I offered him a hunt of his lifetime as well as thenext-door neighbor that I grew up with so they could come together. I even bought him an airline ticket from Toronto to Whitehorse and returned and sent him all sorts of Yukon hunting brochures and pictures. A week before they were scheduled to leave for the Yukon, I got a phone call saying that they got a map of Canada, and they both figured that it was too far to come to go hunting. Neither of them had ever been on an airplane or had either of them driven out of Ontario. I had a heck of a time getting the money back from the airlines for his flight.

This being the local medical practitioner ended when a member performed a successful appendix operation with a doctor on the Single Side Band Radio in Yellowknife during spring break-up at a Northern Detachment, when they could not get an aircraft into a northern settlement to evacuate the patient.Ottawa even took away the big medicine chests, that were at every small detachment in the North that did not have a Nursing Station.That was a real relief because every month, you had to go through the medicine chest and count every pill of the narcotics, certify their presence with another member present, and then delete the numbers that had been administered to whom, when, and why.The record-keeping was a real pain.There were a lot of settlements that did not have a Nursing Station or any doctors in the area, and the R.C.M.P. was the only medical service that was equipped and source of drugs in the entire area.

 

Search for the missing Prospectors



We used to help the Mining Recorder patrol the creeks, and he supplied us with a 500-foot tape to measure the length of some of the claims. Then, word got out that the police were checking the placement of the claim stakes and measuring the claims, which kept a lot of miners honest. Those who had pits too close to the edge of their claims were measured, and we reported them to the Mining Recorder. They sent people out to check, as we had no way of knowing which direction the miners went at the bottom of the shaft—they could be following the "pay dirt" into their neighbor’s claim.

The Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP) encountered a great deal of difficulty whenForty Mile Creek ran from Alaska into Canada. In Alaska, American claims were 1,000 feet long, and miners could register up to three claims per person. In Canada, however, claims were limited to 500 feet, and one person could only register one claim unless it was a discovery claim, in which case they could register one additional claim on that watercourse.

Many American gold seekers came into the Forty Mile region, and before the arrival of the RNWMP, they had their own form of vigilante justice. When the RNWMP, who also acted as Mining Recorders, arrived, they refused to allow the Americans to register such large claims or more than one claim per person unless it was a discovery claim. This caused a lot of upset among the American miners.

Depending on how one measures it, the Klondike gold region is between 750 and 1,500 square miles. Approximately 200-300 miles of creeks were mined, with claims measuring 500 feet at the creek bottom, extending from rimrock to rimrock (the tops of the creek banks directly opposite the flow of the creek). Where the creek bent, many fraction claims were recorded. These claims were measured with the 500 feet on the outside curve at the top of the bank to the last in-line claim post. Claims were numbered up and down from the discovery claim.

Once a claim was registered, miners were required to make $600 worth of improvements—such as building a cabin or sluice boxes, moving 200 yards of soil, or digging a 40-foot shaft—within a year. If they did not, they had to pay the government $600 each year to keep the claim in good standing. Failure to pay on the registration date resulted in forfeiture, and the claim could be re-registered by anyone.

When I was in Dawson, I had claim number four below the discovery claim on Bonanza Creek for five years. I used it to take friends and visitors to experience gold panning. It was difficult to keep track of who the claims were registered to and even more challenging to get permission to enter the claim and pan for placer gold. Most of the creeks were pretty well mined out, and the heavy pay areas were depleted. The only pay streak on my claim was high on the shoulder of the creek, and the access road leading further up the valley went through my claim on this high shoulder.

A choice bottle of spirits given to the grader operator removed a lot of the overburden, qualifying for the improvements needed to keep my claim open. While grading the road each year, he would uncover some of the pay streak, which was only about three to five inches thick, and my parking lot got bigger each year. Pay dirt is an off-colored red compared to the surrounding gravel. I would have guests dig up some pay dirt, load it into a pan or sometimes a couple of five-gallon buckets, and carry it down to the water in the creek. I would demonstrate how to separate the gravel from the gold, and if they were careful, they could recover a dozen or so specks of gold. However, the 200-foot climb back up to the ever-extending parking lot was challenging, and the novelty of gold panning wore off quickly as the effort of getting up and down the embankment and working in extremely cold water became unpleasant, even with rubber gloves. Carrying the buckets—or even just a pan of gravel—was a lot of work.

The Geological Survey of Canada estimated the area of placer gold to be 800 square miles. This was all within our detachment area, which extended halfway to Old Crow. Because we had a summer road that later became the Dempster Highway, we patrolled all the way to Fort McPherson in the Northwest Territories. Our detachment area extended 150 miles north, over 200 miles east to the NWT border, west to the Alaska border, and about 70 miles south, bordering the Mayo detachment area, which included the Stewart River. I never measured or calculated the total square mileage of our detachment area. There were only four members in the Dawson City detachment when I was posted there.

Oil exploration was taking place in the Eagle Plain area, and they had “winter roads,” which were seismic lines that ran perfectly straight for miles in a northerly direction. Every five miles, these lines branched east and west from the main north-south lines. The roads were only maintained during the winter when Seconi Mobile was drilling for oil in the area. I once drove to within about 40 miles of Old Crow, to a drill site called “Molar.” From the top of the hill there, you could see the lights of the village. I claim to be the first member of the RCMP to have driven a police car across the Arctic Circle.

Because there were aircraft and helicopter companies in Dawson City, we had access to them for large searches or investigations in remote areas, as well as access to the RCMP Air Division’s single Otter aircraft stationed in Whitehorse. One search I led involved a group of three prospectors/investors who had hired a helicopter out of Whitehorse and secretly flown into the Ogilvie Mountains northeast of Dawson City. They filed a flight plan from Whitehorse to Dawson City and closed it with the Department of Transport (DOT) in Dawson City, so there was no reason for us to check on their whereabouts, as we had no knowledge they were in our detachment area.

Their backup was a fourth partner in Vancouver. After sobering up a week or so later and realizing they hadn’t contacted him, he reported them missing to the Vancouver City Police. Their secret "motherlode" was drawn on the back of a cigarette package, with "Chapman Lake, Yukon" written and an arrow pointing northwest from the writing. The Vancouver policeman gave me the contact details of the fourth partner and turned him over to me on the phone.

I spoke with him, but he had no idea what the others were wearing or what colors their jackets or clothes were other than recalling they wore "bush clothes." When I suggested brown camouflage, he agreed that’s what they had been wearing when he last saw them in Vancouver. They had hats with mosquito shields and were prospecting northeast of Dawson City, looking for silver, gold, and a large nickel deposit that he had found. They were going to stake the claims and register them with the Mining Recorder in Dawson City. He sounded legitimate and knowledgeable about prospecting.

He told me that, a few years earlier, he had hired a local Native man and his son to take him down the Yukon River by boat to Forty Mile. From there, they packed his camp and supplies about 40 miles east into the Ogilvie Mountains, where he prospected the area but didn’t quite reach the location of the mineral deposit he had identified with the Natives. When he returned to Dawson City that fall, he ended up drinking and didn’t have the money to register the claims. He had carried his camp and supplies to the claim area, taken twelve pictures showing the deposit’s extent, and spent time in Vancouver trying to find a partner to develop the find.

They had the samples tested and assayed, showing good signs of nickel, gold, and silver. Satisfied that there was good potential, they put together a partnership. Since most helicopters could only carry three passengers, the fourth man stayed behind in Vancouver. He said his partners flew to Whitehorse and took a helicopter from there to the location he had vividly described. He had staked the claims, leaving pieces of his red plaid shirt on the claim posts, and had shown their location only on a road map of the Yukon. He gave me the names of his partners.

I confirmed with the airline that they had flown from Vancouver to Whitehorse and checked with the local Department of Transport office to confirm when the helicopter flight plan was closed. The DOT office is in town, and the airport is five miles away. They assumed the helicopter was still at the airport, but I had been there earlier that morning, and there was no helicopter matching their description. I checked with the local fuel distributor, who confirmed delivering twelve 10-gallon drums of fuel to Chapman Lake for a helicopter out of Whitehorse.

This was before the internet, but I knew where Chapman Lake was located—at the end of the gravel section of the Dempster Highway, about 150 miles from Dawson City. To get there, you head south on Hwy #2 for forty miles, then turn north onto Hwy #5 (the Dempster Highway) and continue almost true north for about seventy-five miles to reach Chapman Lake.

We hired a local helicopterand arranged for fuel to be driven to an elevated cache I had built the year before in preparation for a dogsled trip from Dawson City to Fort McPherson. If we needed more fuel, a note would be left on the signboard at the cache, and an envelope would be dropped off at the detachment to report our flights and search locations.

I took a large tent, tent stove, cots, sleeping bags, and cooking equipment, and another member dropped me off in our station wagon. We had no radio contact with Dawson City, as the vehicles didn’t have radios. Instead, we made arrangements for the telephone operator to call Whitehorse for us and reverse the charges. We phoned into the detachment on the telephone, using an old crank phone at the Ogilvie Ridge Lodge. The operator took our message, and the police radio dispatcher relayed it back to Dawson City.

We searched the area for two days. Chapman Lake is about five miles from the Dempster Highway, with deep draws and cliffs surrounding the lakeshore. We found and interviewed many First Nations people who were trapping the lake and creeks in the area. None of them had seen the helicopter we were looking for.

From where we located them, they were over 100 miles from their helicopter, and they had been walking for ten days. We had been searching for them for six days and had spent 81 hours in the air (as I signed the invoice for what was on the clock). The pilot only had a small .22 caliber survival rifle and had expended his 100 rounds, killing ptarmiganand rabbits and shooting graylings in the creeks and small lakes they came across.

All of the caribou they saw spooked several hundred yards away, and they hadn’t eaten for two days. They still had three to four days of walking ahead of them before they would reach the Dempster Highway, and they needed to cross a large mountain range before reaching the heavily wooded area where the highway runs through. We shared all the food we had with us and walked with them to the first painted sign in Seela Pass.

Had they known they were paralleling the Dempster Highway, they would have realized that Chapman Lake was only 25 miles east of where we located them. Had they stayed in that valley, they would have had another 130 miles to go before encountering the Dempster Highway.

About two hours later, both helicopters arrived. They had to refuel at Chapman Lake and brought what little food we had at our camp. We fed the men the remaining food we had, and then both helicopters loaded up, and we flew directly to Dawson City. All three of them were successful businessmen from Vancouver, and I don’t believe they would be interested in any more mining ventures in the Yukon Territory for the rest of their lives.

They had not found the claims marked with pieces of the red plaid jacket, and I can attest that the vast area of the Yukon we covered during our search did not contain the claim posts. I had marked lines on my topographic map for every place we searched. Each day, I used a different colored pencil to keep track of where we had flown, with red dots marking the spots where we landed. At no time during those six long days of flying in the helicopter,we located any signs of human presence or the red plaid jacket on the claim posts. We covered a huge portion of the Ogilvie Mountains northwest of Chapman Lake, where the gold, silver, and nickel deposits were allegedly located.



 

Assisting the Mining Recorder



We used to assist the Mining Recorder in patrolling the creeks, and he provided us with a 500-foot tape to measure the length of some of the claims. Once word got out that the police were checking the placement of claim stakes and measuring the claims, it helped keep many claimholders honest. Those with pits close to the edge of their claims were measured in, and we reported them to the Mining Recorder. They would then send people out to verify, as we had no way of knowing if they were following the “pay dirt” into a neighboring claim.

A major challenge arose for the Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP), where Forty Mile Creek crossed from Alaska into Canada. American claims were 1,000 feet long, and one person could register up to three claims. In contrast, Canadian claims were only 500 feet long, and one person could only have one claim registered, aside from the discovery claim on that water course. Many American gold seekers came to Forty Mile and practiced a form of vigilante justice before the Royal Northwest Mounted Police arrived. The police, acting as Mining Recorders, did not allow such large claims and enforced the one-claim-per-person rule unless it was the discovery claim, which upset many American miners.

The Klondike gold region spans between 750 and 1,500 square miles, with approximately 200-300 miles of creeks mined. Claims were 500 feet wide along the creek bottom and from rim rock to rim rock (the top of the banks directly opposite the creek’s flow). In areas where the creek bent, there were many fractional claims measured and recorded from the top of the bank outside the curve to the point where the last claim post was located. Claims were numbered sequentially from the discovery claim.

Once you paid your money and registered a claim, you had to complete $600 worth of improvements to keep the claim in good standing. This could involve building a cabin or sluice boxes, moving 200 yards of soil, or digging 40 feet of shaft. If you did not complete these improvements, you had to pay the government $600 each year to maintain the claim. Failure to make the payment by the registry date meant the claim was forfeited and could be re-registered by anyone.

While I was in Dawson, I had Claim number four below the discovery claim on Bonanza Creek for five years. I used it to take friends and visitors to experience gold panning. It was difficult to keep track of who the claims were registered to and to get permission to access them, especially to practice panning for placer gold. Most creeks were well-mined out, and the heavy pay areas were depleted. The only pay streak on my claim was high on the shoulder of the creek, and the access road further up the valley ran through the claim on this high shoulder.

A generous bottle of spirits helped a grader operator remove a lot of overburden, qualifying as improvements to keep my claim open. As he graded the road each year, he exposed some of the pay streak, which was only about three to five inches thick. My parking lot expanded each year. Pay dirt is an off-colored red compared to the surrounding gravel. I would let guests dig up some pay dirt, load up a pan or a couple of five-gallon buckets, and then carry it down to the creek. I demonstrated how to separate the gravel from the gold, and if they were careful, they could recover a dozen or so specks of gold. However, the 200-foot climb back up to my ever-expanding parking lot quickly wore off the novelty of gold panning. The effort of climbing up and down the embankment and working in extremely cold water, even with rubber gloves, was challenging.

The Geological Survey of Canada estimated the Klondike region to be 800 square miles. It was all within our Detachment area, extending halfway to Old Crow. Because we had a summer road that eventually became the Dempster Highway, stretching all the way to Fort McPherson in the Northwest Territories, our area extended 150 miles north, 200 miles east to the N.W.T. border, west to the Alaska border, and about 70 miles south, bordering the Mayo detachment area, which included the Stewart River. I never measured or calculated the exact number of square miles in our Detachment area. Only four members were stationed there when I was posted to Dawson City.

Due to oil exploration in the Eagle Plain area, which had winter roads maintained only during the winter, I drove to within about 40 miles of Old Crow and claimed to be the first RCMP member to drive a police car across the Arctic Circle. With aircraft and helicopter companies based in Dawson City, we had access to them for major searches or investigations in remote areas of the detachment, as well as the Air Division’s single Otter stationed in Whitehorse.

One search that stands out involved a group of three prospectors/investors who had hired a helicopter from Whitehorse and secretly went into the Ogilvie and Richardson Mountains northeast of Dawson. They filed a flight plan from Whitehorse to Dawson City and closed their flight plan with the Department of Transport (DOT) in Dawson, so there was no reason to check on their whereabouts, as we had no knowledge of their presence in our Detachment area.

Their backup was the fourth partner, still in Vancouver. When he sobered up a week or so later and realized he hadn’t heard from them, he contacted the Vancouver City Police to report them missing. Their secret “mother lode” was sketched on the back of a cigarette package, with “Chapman Lake, Yukon” written on it, and an arrow indicating the direction of the north was above the writing. The Vancouver policeman provided me with his phone number and handed him over to me.

I spoke with him, and he had no details about what the group was wearing except that they had bush clothes. When I mentioned brown camouflage, he confirmed that was their attire, and they had hats with mosquito shields. They were northeast of Dawson City, searching for silver, gold, and a big nickel deposit they intended to stake and register with the Mining Recorder in Dawson City. He sounded knowledgeable about prospecting and seemed legitimate.

He recounted that, during a visit to Dawson City, he had hired a local Native and his son to take him by boat to Forty Mile. They had then packed his camp and supplies about forty miles east into the Ogilvie Mountains. He had prospected the area a few years earlier but hadn’t gone to the exact location of the minerals with the Natives. When he returned to Dawson in the fall, he had been drinking and lacked the funds to register the claims. He had left twelve pictures of the claims, showing the extent of the deposit. He had spent time trying to find partners and ended up in Vancouver.

The group tested their samples, assayed them, and planned a partnership. Given that most helicopters only held three passengers, he decided to wait in Vancouver. He said they flew to Whitehorse and intended to use a helicopter from there to the described location. He had staked the claims and left parts of his red plaid shirt on the claim posts. He had only pointed out the location on a road map of the Yukon and gave me the names of his partners.

I checked with the airline, which confirmed that the group had flown from Vancouver to Whitehorse, but no passengers by those names had flown since. I also verified with the local Department of Transport office when the flight plan was closed and assumed the helicopter was still at the airport, which was five miles from town.

This was before the Internet era, so I knew Chapman Lake was located about 150 miles from Dawson City, at the end of the gravel Dempster Highway. To get there, you had to travel south on Highway #2 for forty miles, then turn north on Highway #5 (the Dempster Highway), and head almost true north for about seventy-five miles.

We hired a local helicopter, and I arranged for fuel to be driven to an elevated cache I had built the previous year for an anticipated dogsled trip from Dawson City to Fort McPherson. If we needed more fuel, a note would be left on the signboard at the cache, and an envelope would be dropped off at the detachment reporting our flights and search areas.

I took a big tent, a stove, cots, sleeping bags, and cooking equipment, and another member dropped me off in our station wagon police car. We had no radio contact with Dawson City, as the police radio was only effective within about ten miles, and the Department of Transport radio was of little use in the mountains. It was not until the third day that we located their fuel cache of empty ten-gallon barrels and their four small tents. There were signs that they had been collecting rock samples. The next day, we found the helicopter in a deep valley about 80 miles from their camp in the mountains.

I checked the fuel tanks, which were empty, indicating they had either run out of fuel and set the helicopter down or used the last of the fuel to start signal fires. There were signs of three large signal fires made with green branches and spruce piles, which would have created a lot of smoke. The ashes were cold, suggesting the fires had been out for several days. The pilot checked the helicopter, and the key was still in the off position. The emergency crash beacon was intact and not activated, so no aerial search had been initiated using that signal. There were signs that they had caught, cooked, and eaten a lot of grayling, as evidenced by fish bones found by the fire.

We had to return to Chapman Lake for fuel, and with the perpetual daylight, the pilot needed some rest daily. The following day, we took off with all the fuel we could carry, using the location of the other helicopter as our outer base station, and continued our search from that point. We followed the creek to where it emerged from the side of a mountain. He dropped me off, and I crossed the depression, looking in the moss for any signs of four people walking. Next, we searched in the other direction; when he found a landing spot, I checked across the many game trails for tracks. We could not determine how they had left the valley where the helicopter was located.

We then flew to the tops of the surrounding mountains where the helicopter could land, and we scanned in every direction. I had binoculars and a telescope for long-distance viewing if we spotted anything suspicious. The weather remained clear and sunny, with temperatures in the high 70s to early 80s Fahrenheit and only the occasional scattered rainstorm in some valleys. I continued to fire my service revolver in three-shot bursts and listened for any response from any direction.

The area was crisscrossed with endless game trails, and there were around 50,000 caribou summering in the Eagle Plain area. We made numerous stops to check for boot tracks whenever we encountered wet areas on the game trails. Typically, the pilot would land the helicopter half a mile from the game trails and shut it down to conserve fuel. After several miles in heavy tangle-foot brush, I was becoming exhausted. The stunted spruce trees grew up to the "Tree Line," around the 6,000-foot level, consistent worldwide. Above this line, trees become smaller and more sparse.

The mountains in that area vary in height from 7,000 to 8,000 feet, with the valley floor approximately 2,000 feet, and the mountain passes mostly around 3,000 feet above sea level. Some mountain ranges extend 20 to 30 miles, with prominent peaks and rugged rock shoulders above the tree line. Photos of Tombstone Territorial Park, where people have admired the grandeur of the area, are now widely available on the Internet.

Caribou migration trails meander rather than follow a straight path as they feed briefly on leaves and lichens before moving to the next likely mouthful. This results in the meandering pattern of the trails, which can be a foot deep. In fall, the caribou use these well-worn trails to migrate west to the Richardson and Ogilvie Mountains from Alaska. In spring, they return to Alaska, where they feed on tundra and drop their calves. During their migration, they avoid wolves, which prey on smaller animals like rabbits, mice, marmots, ptarmigan, deer, moose, elk, buffalo, and muskox.

Some valleys have up to fifty game trails crisscrossing them, used for moving between valleys. These trails, used for thousands of years, are hard-packed and about a foot wide. Whenever there was dense spruce growth in a valley, we would fly around it and land, then fire three signal shots into the air and conduct a "hoot and holler" search.

After ordering a second and third load of fuel, the pilot decided we needed to return to Dawson and involve more people in the search. He was likely frustrated with flying long hours daily, totaling about ten to twelve hours some days. Despite our efforts, we had not found any signs or tracks of the four individuals since they had left their helicopter. My topographic maps were covered with the routes we had flown, and all landing points were marked with colored dots.

I directed the pilot towards Seela Pass, which leads through the mountains directly toward Dawson City. Seela Pass is on the continental divide, separating waters flowing west into the Yukon River watershed and eventually into the Bering Strait from those flowing east into the Mackenzie River and then north into the Beaufort Sea.

 

I wanted to show him Tombstone Mountain, which I had climbed earlier in the summer with a companion from Dawson. The oil company had flown in fluorescent-painted sheets of ¾-inch plywood using a large helicopter and dropped them in a straight line at intervals they estimated to be 500 feet apart. I had been dropped off to erect them, ensuring they were exactly in a straight line, with the fluorescent faces oriented to minimize snow collection. These markers were set up to help aircraft navigate the pass safely in poor visibility.

As we rounded the base of a mountain on the way to the pass, we spotted the four individuals frantically waving. We landed and greeted the very tired, hungry hikers. We shared the food we had with us and decided to rescue their downed helicopter. They could then use our fuel cache to fly the helicopter out.

The pilot flew back to their helicopter with a load of fuel while I told him we would meet him at the first fluorescent sign in the pass, about two miles away, where we were on a solid, wide game trail. Chapman Lake was about 25-30 miles from where we found them and about 75 miles from Dawson City.

The hikers had compasses and stayed in the mountains to avoid the dense spruce in the valleys to the west. They knew that the Dempster Highway ran northeast from Dawson City, so if they continued southerly, they would eventually intersect with the Dempster Highway.

From where we located them to their helicopter was over 100 miles, and they had been walking for ten days. We had searched for six days and accumulated 81 hours in the air (according to the invoice). The pilot had only a small .22 caliber survival rifle, which he used to kill ptarmiganand rabbits and shoot graylings from creeks and small lakes. All the caribou they encountered had spooked and kept their distance, and they hadn’t eaten for two days. They still had three to four days of walking ahead to reach the Dempster Highway and a big range of mountains before reaching the heavily wooded area through which the highway runs.

We shared all the remaining food with them and walked to the first painted sign in Seela Pass. If they had known they were paralleling the Dempster Highway and Chapman Lake was only 25 miles east of where we found them, they could have avoided another 130 miles of travel.

About two hours later, both helicopters arrived. They needed to refuel at Chapman Lake and brought the remaining food from our camp. We fed the hikers with what was left and then flew directly to Dawson City. All three were successful businessmen from Vancouver, and I don’t believe they would be interested in any more mining ventures in the Yukon Territory for the rest of their lives.

  

Diving on The Pirate Ship in Ferryland Harbour



Looking into the history of the hundreds of shipwrecks around the coast of Newfoundland and Labrador, we managed to take a picture of the map compiled up to 1903. We were at the museum, and the curator briefly displayed the map. I was brushing my hair with my “Minox – Sesler” spy camera, and it happened to go off. After processing the film, we had every location, date, and name of the ship that hit the rocks and was recorded. In questioning whether to mention the viewing of the map, I checked on the Internet, and it is fully displayed there for everyone to now view the repeated disasters recorded up until 1903. We got the names and dates of the wrecks and sent a text out to Lloyds of London Insurance on a lot of them, mostly on the Avalon Peninsula, to see if they were insured by them and to question whether they were inbound or outbound. If they were outbound, they would likely be filled with cod and would not have any or little money on board.

It was a habit of the Newfoundlanders to hang a light on their horses and cows overnight, and the sailing ships would head for the light. There is no reverse in a sailing ship, and the Newfoundlanders only had to gather up the spoils and booty along the shore. Our gathering of marine specimens, assisting the Marine Biology Section of Memorial University, was focused on those locations for a couple of years. Then, a big discovery was made off Nova Scotia with a lot of treasure, and the Newfoundland Government enacted the Historical Artifacts Act with a $15,000 fine associated with it. Our focus for collecting specimens was directed elsewhere after looking at the enactment. It was obvious that they were interested in stopping any treasure hunters from looking in their waters.

Researching some history, it seems in the 16th and 17th centuries, Queen Elizabeth I gave permission for Peter Easton to act as a privateer to protect the British interest in the fishery on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland. It was understood that over time, he collected a fleet of 40 ships to protect their interests in Newfoundland and Labrador. In 1602, he built a fort at Harbour Grace in Conception Bay and worked the eastern seaboard, capturing and removing anything of value and capturing any ship that did not fly the British flag.

Peter Easton (1570 – 1620 or after) was an English privateer and later pirate in the early 17th century. Conflicting accounts exist regarding his early life. By 1602, Easton had become a highly successful privateer, commissioned to protect English interests in Newfoundland waters. On 23 June 1604, after Elizabeth I was succeeded by James I, the king sued for peace with Spain and canceled all letters of commission to privateers. On hearing the news, Easton continued his attack on vessels as though nothing had changed. In so doing, he had crossed the line into piracy. He then moved to the Caribbean, where the spoils were more generous as the Spanish were robbing the treasures of Central and South America.

Local rumor was that his ship or one of his ships had been sunk right in the harbor of Ferryland, which was one of the harbors that he moved to be closer to the eastern seaboard of Newfoundland. I had another investigation in the area and talked it over with some of the locals, and they pointed out exactly where the vessel went down. The folklore had been handed down from generation to generation. The story was that they had captured one of the Portuguese vessels and brought it into the harbor at Ferryland to transfer the cargo. The ship had a lot of wine on board, and when they were transferring the booty over to the pirate ship, the crew had been over-sampling a lot of the Portuguese wine and somehow upset one of the lamps, and the boat caught on fire. In their drunken stupor to put out the fire, they opened the sea cocks, figuring that it was anchored close to shore so it would put the fire out and the ship would be saved. Unfortunately, the water was 80 feet deep where it was anchored, and the pirate vessel sunk to the bottom. Easton and his crew then sailed off in the Portuguese vessel, and the Portuguese sailors were left in the fishing village of Ferryland.

With SCUBA gear, we had been recovering and restoring a lot of cod trap anchors, and we called in favor of one of the fishermen at Quidi-Vidi to take our diving crew from St. John’s to Ferryland, a distance of about 50 miles in his big skiff. We had no trouble locating the wreck when we got into the water, as the captain had anchored directly above the remains. It was a pile of rotten planks strewn over about a two-hundred-foot area that was easily moved as the calcareous algae had not cemented it all together so we could get to the cargo area without difficulty. We found groupings of small cannonballs that were obviously used as shrapnel; they produced holes in the sails of the pursued boat they were overtaking and also would have injured a lot of the crew.

There were hundreds of bottles of wine that proved to be vinegar upon our sampling. I found the rusty part of a sextant and a brass-bound box. When I got it open, it contained a loaded pistol with a flared end on the barrel that had three notches in the forestock and silver filigree on the forestock, as well as the lead ball-making pliers and the captain’s clay pipe. Some of the wood on the pistol had rotted out, and I sanded the wood, saved the sawdust, and filled the area in with glue and the wood dust. I brushed off the light rust that was on the metal parts, drilled the charge out of the barrel, polished all the metal parts, and restored it to its original condition.

There were an endless number of brass spikes in and around the wreck, and most of them were still in some of the chunks of wood. The brass box did not deteriorate in the salt water, and there was no exchange of water within the small box, protecting the contents. I found the remaining brass flares that had been on other small wooden boxes that had deteriorated along with their contents. The ship had lead sheeting on the bottom of the boat, and the entire outline of the ship was set out on the bottom as the lead had not deteriorated. We recovered a lot of the brass spikes that were loose in the rotted wood and timbers, and they were mostly turned over to the maritime museum, as well as the stock of wine bottles and other artifacts.

We had exhausted our time down at 80 feet and had to terminate our dive period for the day, so we headed back to St. John’s. It was a nice sunny day, and we had laid out the little cannonballs all over the deck on both sides of the vessel to let them dry. On the way home, some of them began to smoke, so spontaneous combustion was likely happening, and we decided it was best to throw them overboard before they exploded. There was a mad scramble to find them all and throw them into the ocean. We turned some of the bigger pieces of lead sheeting over to the museum, the bottles of wine, a lot of brass spikes, and dozens of clay pipes.

When I got back to the barracks and was washing my diving gear in fresh water, I found one of the small cannonballs that had rolled down the deck and was in the shade of my wet diving gear. I very quickly took it out and put it on the top of an ant hill a couple of hundred yards away from the buildings and in the trees. I checked on it a couple of weeks later, and it had not exploded. Sixty-three years later, I still have it in my collection of goodies.

When I show the pistol to anyone and tell them that it is a pirate’s pistol, they figure I am really stringing them along. When I point out the three notches in the forestock, I don’t know if they signify ships or men. It is hard to make them a believer, but that is the background of those pictures.

  

 

Scuba Diving –(Self Contained Breathing Apparatus)



When we were growing up in Ontario, we learned to swim in the North River about two miles from our home. My grandfather’s farm was on the north side of the river, and we used to swim a couple of miles up and down the river in the summer.At home, in the North River, I referred to the water as being “Pasturized” because it drained every pasture in the country as the water was a light brown color.It had to be fairly safe as I cannot ever recall anybody being sick or catching anything from swimming in the river, but the visibility was about a foot.

I first started using SKUBA when a buddy rented a system, and I drove him south of Tobermory on the Bruce Peninsula on the west side of the Georgian Bay.The shoreline is limestone and the water is crystal clear as the peninsula sticks out between the Georgian Bay and Lake Huron some 60 miles.You had the sensation and fear of falling when you were swimming along with a mask and goggles and being able to see fish 30 feet down as the water was so clear they seemed to be suspended.

We spent almost every weekend for two summers diving in that area, and there were several sunken boats along that shoreline to be invested in.Both of us purchased better and better equipment and wet suits to extend our season when the water cooled in the fall.We took lessons on the use of the gear at theY.M.C.A. in Orillia, and I received the Bonze Medallion and Award of Merit from the St. John Ambulance Society.We ended up sharing the price of a compressor with a few others to fill our tanks.

I joined the Royal Canadian Mounted Police on the 9th of February, 1961, and headed off to the “Depot” Division in Regina, Saskatchewan, for training.I excelled at swimming, and during the first swimming period, we were divided into swimmers and none swimmers. Then you went up onto the high diving board and went with a nonswimmer on your back and jumped from there into the water.I had my instructions on how to deal with a frightened individual in the water and quickly brought him to the edge of the pool.The instructor questioned where I learned how to do that, and I told him the YMCA and that as part of their instructions for their award of Merit and Bronze Medallion from the St. Johns Lifesaving Society.After that, I was given my troop members to instruct them on swimming after hours, and it meant that I was going to the pool every night for weeks.

When we were just about finished training, we were given an option of where we would like to be posted first.I chose Alberta, and the second choice was British Columbia.I guess they thought that I wanted a maritime climate, so I got posted to St. John’s, Newfoundland/Labrador.On my way through Ontario, I visited my family and picked up my SCUBA gear and a few of my rifles.

In the first week, I was in St. John’s, I met a chap who was also a scuba diver. He was with the Canadian Army Military Intelligence Corp and was also an avid diver and was working on his degree in Marine Biology in his off time at Memorial University.He showed me some of the pictures he produced with a pen dot process that was going to be part of this thesis and had the names on every one of them.It was a whole new world for me and we went diving together on the first weekend that I had off.I had brought up a round, spiny creature, and I was showing him the object sitting on my right hand and thumb and watching the sharp spins moving slightly.He was shouted a warning that those urchins could really bite.At that moment, it had a hold of the edge of my hand and continued to close its five teeth on the edge of my hand.It continued to close it’s teeth until it had taken out the whole chunk of my hand about 3/8th of an inch across.I still have ascar on the base of my first finger.Here, I was trying to stop the bleeding, and he wanted to take it to the tanks at the University because that was the largest Urchin that he had ever seen.

He had a “shore crew” with him that included the whole family of one of the Army base cooks. When we were about to go for another dive, he had a short piece of a broomstick, and I accompanied him. When we went down to about 50 feet, he began poking in a depression under a big rock, and when he brought the broomstick out, he had a huge lobster with its fighting claw clamped onto the end of the broomstick. He then grabbed onto the fighting claw and then the crushing claw, and we headed up and onto the beach. One of the beach crew took the lobster and walked it over to a big cauldron of seawater bubbling on the campfire. Before they dropped it in the pot, Jim had him hold the 20-pound lobster up and put the broomstick in the crushing claw, and it snapped it into two pieces instantly. I got my first lesson on the dangers of big lobsters when he allowed it to grab the broomstick in the crushing claw and it snapped the broomstick end right off. It next hit the boiling water, and fifteen minutes later, I had my first taste of lobster and a heck of a first outing.

We continued to attract SCUBA divers and decided to form the Services Diving Club, which involved the Army, Navy, Air Force, and RCMP. Later on, we allowed the Memorial University students to join who were enrolled in the Marine Biology section. We then figured that we should get insurance, and they insisted that we had to have a certified instructor. I was chosen to go to New York and get the training on the PADI Open Water Diver certification and also became an instructor in managing your buoyancy and a Master SCUBA Diver Trainer.

Bell Island Vehicle Accident

They had a chap in his hopped-up vehicle burning circles in the meadow by a drunken party around the fire on Bell Island. It was a drunken party held at the edge of a 150-foot cliff, and he came out of one of the circles, and the taillights were last seen going over the cliff and into the sea. My equipment and services as a SCUBA diver were requested. I drove the big 16-passenger van to Portugal Cove and headed across on the ferry to the island.

Bell Island is located inthe middle of Conception Bay and is the site of the largest and richest iron mines in the world. The shaft of the mine goes down in the middle of the island, and then shafts run out under the sea for miles. There were huge fans at the top of the island that provided pressure to keep the water from seeping into the miles of shafts and flooding them. The ore is then loaded onto boats and shipped to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and Germany.

Arriving at the ferry terminal, the Sgt had a boat and directed one of the members to go up on the meadow and locate the tracks where the car went over the cliff and waved a flag so we would have some idea from the sea where the vehicle went over the cliff. He had one of the trap boats hired, with plenty of room to don my wetsuit and gear. When the member arrived at the cliff top, we anchored where there was an oil sheen on the surface of the water. A long crack in the basalt cliff led straight down from where the member appeared, and it was several hundred feet away from the oil slick. We figured possibly a current along the cliff face had moved the oil slick off from where the member stood at the top. He anchored the boat about 100 feet off the cliff, and the member said the tracks led straight back from where he was standing. The captain of the trap skiff said he thought there was at least 100 feet of anchor chain that he had let out.

I directed him to follow the bubbles that appear on the surface, and I would appreciate it if he would be close to the bubble path. I was first going to check right at the base of the cliff and then go down from there. I was taking a security line with me as I was diving alone, which was not the recommended procedure, but everyone in the club was tied up or working.

We worked out a signal system: two jerks to give me more line, and he was to give one jerk if he got the message. If I gave three jerks, he was to secure the line on the boat as I would be following the line up to the boat and would have a line back down to where I had secured it.

As I was diving alone, I had a small nylon rope clipped to my weight belt as a safety precaution. We went through the routine of what different jerks on the rope meant and ensured that the boat captain had a handle on our signal messages. I put my wetsuit on, as well as tanks and mask, and went into the water backwards, and swam over to the cliff face on the surface. I saw that the rock face continued down and then encountered a rubble of big rocks about 20 feet below the surface, and the broken rocks continually sloped down at about a 45-degree angle.

I encountered the dark red Pontiac lying on its roof on the slope with the rear of the vehicle up towards the surface. The driver’s window was down, and I could not feel if the driver was in the driver's position or the passenger seat of the vehicle. The sun was not on the water as the area was in the shadow of the cliff, and visibility was about three to four feet. I took the clip off my weight belt, put the rope around the steering wheel, and then clipped it back onto the weight belt so that I would have a direct line going back to the vehicle. I signaled for more lines to be let out and headed to the surface. Considering that I was at 100 feet, I decided to go to the surface, advise them of my findings, and deal with decompression.

To deal with decompression, you allow a breath of air out while you are vertical, pick the smallest bubble, keep it in the face mask, and keep pace with it as it rises all the way to the surface. I had only been a few minutes at this depth, and it was just a precaution used to prevent nitrogen build-up in your blood. You just breathe normally, and it prevents the “bends” and theneed for a session in the decompression chamber. I was at 100 feet of water and slowly headed to the surface.

I got into the boat and briefed the Sgt on my initial findings, saying that I thought there was a chance that the driver might have exited the vehicle. I decided that I would return to the surface and keep them abreast of my findings. I told them that the visibility was poor, but I would take a flashlight down and check the vehicle thoroughly. I suggested that trying to do a dragging operation on such a rocky, steep slope with such large rocks and at that depth would not be possible or likely to be successful. With the cold seawater, the bloating of the body would take weeks, and a search with SCUBA at that depth was not possible because of the decompression issue, which limited the time at that depth to 10 to 15 minutes.

I had my service flashlight in my diving bag and big plastic bags, so I put the flashlight in the plastic bag and tied a big knot in the plastic bag. I had a direct line to the vehicle and I wanted the Sgt. to recover the slack in the line as I went back down to the vehicle. I told the captain that there was a hitch on the rear of the vehicle and that if he wished, I could take a line down and run it through the frame on the hitch. He said he had a thousand feet of half-inch line in the bottom of the boat, and if I brought the end back up to the boat instead of tying it on, they could have four to five lengths of the line down through the hitch to lift it and to tow it back to the beach by the landing as the family owned a garage on the island and would be able to fix it.

I got back in the water and followed my small cord back down to the vehicle with the captain’s line in one hand. Initial use of the flashlight helped confirm the subject was not in the front seat area, and after a cursory search from the open window, I could not see the body in the rear area. I reached into the window with the flashlight in my left hand and looked through the window, and I could see that he was mostly down on the floor in front of the seat, lying on his back.

Getting the rear passenger door open was not possible on that side because it was resting against a rock about halfway up the door. I then headed to the other side of the vehicle. I fished the line underneath the bracket holding the tow bar. As I swam past the trunk and decided to hit the button that held the trunk shut, it opened violently, and two spare tires came out and headed for the surface. I was able to get the rear door partly open and got the body out with some difficulty as rigor mortis had set in, and his legs and arms were stiff, and the rear door would not open all the way. I tied the loose end of the small rope onto the body that I had used as a security line, as well as the loose end of the rope, and knotted it well around the subject. I then passed the end of the half-inch line into the frame of the trailer hitch and tied it around the subject, and we slowly made our way back to the surface. Getting the body into the boat, I passed them the portion of the rope, and they lifted him into the boat. I passed my tanks into the boat and wrapped the rope around under my shoulders, and they lifted me over the side of the boat with ease.

They wrapped the body in canvas, and we headed for the mainland and my vehicle at Portugal Cove. The body would have to be examined by the Coroner, so I took the Sgt. and the body to the Coroner’s office in St. John’s and then returned him to the ferry terminal at Portugal Cove.

The Sgt. forwarded a glowing report of the successful body recovery, which resulted in me having to submit a report on my total involvement in the body recovery, and the Force decided that SCUBA diving was not a safe sport and that I would have to submit an individual report on each and every time I went diving, and it had to be signed by my dive partner for each and every dive that I went on. This was a great inconvenience because some days, we had two and sometimes three dives at different places at different depths. But in compliance with the directive, I had a record of over three hundred hours at or below 60 feet of water during the rest of my service using SCUBA.

Jim McCullough became my constant dive partner, and we were diving in Conception Bay on one open-water dive. As we were coming back to shore, we saw a bunch of flatfish circle around a great number of baited hooks lying on the sandy bottom as we headed to shore. As we got out on the beach, we found a University student with an endless number of fishing rods set up along the beach.

We talked with him, and he was doing his thesis on the inner ear bone of a flatfish. Jim asked him how many he had studied, and he had based his work to date on only five flatfish. He was asked how many he thought he should have, and he figured he had hoped to base his study on 100 flatfish. He said he had ten big tubs but had only caught one flatfish that week and only one that day. Jim said for him to get his tubs partially filled with water, and we would get him his quota in a few minutes.

We had built what we called “shark sticks,” which were a stainless steel sharpened rod about 18 inches long and a quarter of an inch in diameter and were tucked under our weight belt as our usual protection. There is fish being processed in every community, and the affluence from the fish is discarded into the sea, resulting in a greater number of sharks in the area of all varieties. We had these in Jim’s VW van when we doffed our tanks and weight belt before walking up to visit our fisherman.

We went back into the water and began stabbing all these flatfish around his baits. When we had 125 in the tanks, he was having trouble keeping them in his tanks, and he headed out for the University. He was in possession of fish of every size and age so he could get a good cross-section to show the difference in growth and structure.

 

Deepest dive with perfect visibility



We were asked if we could retrieve a number of cod trap anchors in some deep water, and the people making the request figured it was about 80 feet of water. We prepared several float-attached parachute cords that we could loop through the anchor rings, and they could then drag a heavy rope down and back up, giving them two lines to lift and recover the anchor. Most of the anchors were just big blocks of poured cement with a big loop of steel embedded in the cement. The shoreline was limestone, and the fisherman’s skiff took us to the location that was supposed to have a number of abandoned anchors. As they used the same sites year after year and kept using the same anchor points for their “trap” and left the ropes attached year after year, the ropes deteriorated with time, and the float that suspended the ropes floated off, and the deteriorated rope sank to the bottom.

I should put together a word description of the “trap” for all those not being Newfoundlanders or involved in the commercial fishing industry. They run a line of the net from the shore out several hundred feet, and then there is a four-sided square of the net with a bottom that is suspended out using these anchor points with floats along the top and lead sinkers holding the net downward. The shoreline net goes inside the box of the net on the shoreside of the net, possibly ten to fifteen feet. Sometimes, one side is attached to the box opening. The salmon and cod normally go up the shore, feeding into the current,run into the shoreline net, swim into the open side of the box of the net, and continue to circle inside the net. Usually, the fishermen attend the net each day and then begin lifting the net near the opening shore side of the net and continue to raise the box of the net until they are able to scoop the captured fish into the trap skiff and then let it back down to continue the fish capture. The fishermen develop a lot of upper body and arm strength from a lifetime of hauling the net up to the boat in cold water. The deterioration of one line results in the site being unusable, and to build new anchors, load them into a boat, lift them off the trap skiff, and place them in the right location is a month of work and a pile of resources, so our refurbishing the trap side is a great help to the fishermen.

As we had a boat above us, Jim’s daughter accompanied us on that dive. When we entered the water, I was really surprised bythe clarity of the water. You had the sensation that you were going to fall, as the water was crystal clear, and all you could see was the jumble of rocks way below you. Their idea of 80 feet of water proved to be 100 to 110 feet by our depth gauges. After locating three of the anchors and attaching our floats, Jim’s daughter indicated that she was getting cold, and we watched as she slowly made her way to the surface. We could clearly see her give a big wave near the boat, and we compared our depth gauges and were surprised that we were at 110 feet and could clearly see her swim to the boat and be hoisted aboard. We had wet suits on, and the bubbles in the rubber foam began to reduce in size from the increased water pressure as wewentdeeper, and the insulation factor was reduced considerably. The thermos of really warm water that we usually pour down the neck of the wetsuit extends the comfort time of the dive.

We located one more anchor and attached the float mechanism and the circle of a small rope. I noted the time down and motioned that we should head to the surface as our time at that depth had ended to prevent the possibility of contacting the dreaded “bends.” To prevent it from happening, you had calculated the time at that depth and not exceed that time, and then it was a simple task of expelling a breath of air and then locating the smallest bubble of air and keeping it in front of your face mask and breathing normally as you went up slowly following that small bubble of air. The “bends” is caused by the nitrogen collecting in your blood, and the really tiny veins in your joints all over your body will not pass through the small veins that go through the vessels that service joints in your body and cause a great deal of pain and discomfort at joints all over your body and could be fatal if a decompression chamber was not immediately available. Knowing that there was not one available in Newfoundland and the nearest one was at the Navy’s headquarters in Halifax, Nova Scotia, we could not afford to take a chance to stay at that depth over our calculated period of time.

It was a great experience to have such clear water when the clearest was that we usually dove in was just about fifty-foot visibility, and knowing that we made four anchors available for another fisherman’s cod trap in the immediate area, it was considered a great success. We managed to collect some of the calciferous algae that werebright pink in color for the Memorial University Marine Biology Section. It is normally grey to white. It forms on everything on the ocean bottom where there is fairly little current, cements everything together, and grows on the rocks, and in a few years, it builds on everything that does not move on the bottom of the ocean. I have encountered it in the Atlantic, Arctic, Pacific, and the Gulf of Mexico, where I have had the pleasure of diving.

With the Force figuring that SCUBA diving was not a safe sport or hobby, they mandated that I submit a report on each and every dive and had my dive partner sign the report. It resulted in me having a very accurate and complete list of my dives in the three years that I was stationed in Newfoundland. My dive partner was working on his degree in Marine Biology, so he knew the names of everything we encountered.And we carried chalkboards so I could draw what I saw, and he would be able to name it after the dive. He was drawing the different invertebrates with a pen dot process to make a picture. I suggested that we try taking pictures, and he said it would cost thousands of dollars to get an underwater camera. I bought a ten-dollar camera from the local junk store, sealed it in a clear plastic bag, and on the next dive, I produced a whole roll of black and white pictures of fish and interesting underwater items. We bought more and more cheap cameras and managed to keep the salt water out at deeper and deeper dives.

The water absorbs the different frequencies of light, so at about the ten-foot level, most everything is grey or black, so we needed to produce light at levels below that point. I started working on gluing plexiglass boxes for a camera, and it only had the shutter release and film advance features to control the camera.We initially used aplastic bag around a flashlight for our light source. That led to larger, thicker plexiglass enclosures, a flash that stayed at the ready for the duration of the dive, and a camera that advanced the film itself after the shutter release. With endless pictures of fish in the mating colors, he had no trouble getting his degree in Marine Biology. We were doing some diving in shallow caves and discovered the “Red Sea Cucumbers down at about the thirty-foot level were fluorescing red when they detected our presence, and that should not be happening, and that was part of his submission for his degree. I have about 1500 underwater pictures, and when color photography became reasonably priced, most of them were in color. Up until that point, we processed our black and white film in a very rudimentary dark room facility until I befriended the N.C.O. in charge of the RCMP Identification Section and started volunteering to help him,as the second member was supposed to come in from Ottawa and he developed all sorts of maladies to prevent the transfer to Newfoundland.

I managed to identify a set of prints of an armed robbery suspect and put one of the bad dudes out of commission with free room and board for six months. I got some good court time introducing photographs and scenes of crime that I presented. He then allowed me to help out with photography and scenes of crime drawings to assist him, and I did a lot of work for him in the darkroom, which gave me access to the chemicals. I only had to purchase the paper for developing any of my black-and-white prints, as the chemicals had to be replaced daily, and the odd roll of my film wasdeveloped. He took advantage of sending me out to crime scenes when he was attending to the more serious ones. He was the only identification member serving the entire island and was extremely busy, so my limited help was really appreciated.

He had taken all of the members’ individual photographs that were forwarded with our annual assessment. I used color paints and colored up a copy of my photograph, which went forward to Ottawa. Somebody in Ottawa suggested that all of the photographs be colored, which was quickly shot down by the N.C.O., advising them that it took about five hours to color that photograph and it was done by the member himself and would not be possible without his lab being equipped to print color photographs. It was not long after that when the lab began printing color photographs, and the colored photograph industry changed to color. I have included a copy of the hand-painted print as the cover of the book. It was in my free time that I helped out in the Identification Section, and he encouraged me to join the section. I told him that I had no wish to become a full-time Identification Section member, as I had already applied to go North to the “G” Division and would have to get the Identification training and certification in Ottawa, which did not appeal to me at all.

I had two trips to Ottawa when I was in Newfoundland. The Force had considered taking the FN .308 semi-automatic rifles from the military and spent two weeks disassembling and assembling them, even in the dark, as well as shooting both the C1 (semi-automatic) and the C2 model that was fully automatic on the range. I suggested that the Force not consider taking on such a complicated firearm for endless reasons. The second trip was to get certified to operate a motorcycle. Our week of running a bike in a newly plowed field for eight hours was not the most pleasant experience when I already had possibly 25,000 kilometers on two wheels prior to joining the Force. All I learned was that you could get saddle sores, and you had to dig holes for both wheels to get the big bikes upright by yourself if they went down. It seemed that throughout my service there was always a bike available, and I was detailed to ride for doing enforcement and escorting diplomats or the Queen and Prince Philip on their visits to Canada. When in Newfoundland and doing enforcement on a bike, there was no windshield, and we had a big rubber raincoat that ensured all the rain was directed to your crotch. You were detailed to ten-hour shifts, and rain was a usual occurrence sometime during your shift. The other inconvenience was the round gravel that washed out onto the pavement from every laneway. If you did not hit it going perfectly straight, you could be assured that the bike was going down from underneath you, and doing that a couple of times a shift was not much fun.

 

Stories related to My Carcross Posting



When I was seventeen years of age, they were building the extension of Highway 400 in southern Ontario, which became Highway 69 up to Sudbury. The area at the end of the farmland is part of the Precambrian Shield and features huge granite rock formations. They had to do a lot of dynamiting to blast through these rock formations to build the highway. The highway was bending back and forth to avoid the larger formations, sometimes taking the side off some of them and, in other places, going straight through them. They did a line of small drill holes close together to set out the alignment of the roadway. In the center of these rock cuts, they used six-inch sticks of dynamite that were over a foot long, which had to be lowered into the holes. For the inch-and-a-quarter holes, the stick was dropped in, and the air replacement slowed the stick from going down the hole and cushioned the drop safely.

The unfortunate part of the larger sticks was that the smell of nitroglycerine caused most people to get splitting headaches, and they couldn’t stand loading more than one or two holes before quitting. I used a big truck inner tube that I cut flat, put a slit down the middle, and placed over the hole with the slit over the strings of the clasper that held the big sticks. This dispersed the noxious gases downwind and away from the powder monkey (namely me). I did the first rock cut in record time as the other two walked off with headaches, and the engineer figured it would have taken three people and gave me the wages of the other two. Then, I was off until the next rock cut was ready to be loaded. This continued for the entire length of Highway 69 all the way to Sudbury, and I was given a Powder Monkey certificate that allowed me to purchase dynamite from any outlet. In my off time, I dug a well at home using dynamite to blow the hard pan out of the hole; by how much of the stick I used in the hole, I punched a hole in the center with a big bar. I also did a lot of blowing out stumps and big rocks for farmers around the neighborhood. I attended a course in Nobel, Ontario, where dynamite is manufactured, and learned about the different strengths by the percentages of nitroglycerine it contains.

In the early spring of 1965, I was advised that I would be taking over policing at Carcross Detachment area, which is located south of Whitehorse, some 78 miles away, and off the Alaska Highway about 35 miles. The Tagish Road goes west from Jake’s Corner, crosses over the 1800-foot wooden bridge over the Tagish River, and then 24 miles to Carcross. From there, the road goes north towards Whitehorse, some 78 miles. I was to drop in at Whitehorse to make arrangements to pick up office supplies and the police car. Here I was taking on running my own detachment and having to learn all of the administration of running my own detachment with just four years of service, so there was a real steep learning curve with the monthly reports and returns.

The Force rented a vertical log cabin that had the office in what used to be the living room, with two bedrooms down a long hallway and the kitchen at the very back with a big wood-burning stove, a back door, and a pathway to the building with a half-moon doorway. There was an oil-burning heater on one side of the office area and the front door with windows on either side of the doorway with a slight overhang. The chap who owned the hardware store and hotel with a coffee shop and restaurant also owned a number of buildings stocked with endless merchandise. His father had started the hardware business in the 1900s and had stocked a couple of warehouses with endless products. The gold seekers did not stop in Carcross to shop, and if they came by train, they went on to Whitehorse to buy anything they needed. On my first few days in my new facilities, we had a major storm for three days and very high winds. The dust and sand blew through the cracks between the vertical logs, and there were thin lines of dust all along the west wall of the building. I went to the owner of the building, and he supplied me with rolls of thin vinyl flooring material that I nailed and stapled on the three walls of the office, the two bedrooms, and the kitchen on the west side, as the winds always came up the Bennett Lake and across the sand dunes. Carcross is known to have the “Smallest Desert in the World,” and I can attest to it having the finest sand and dust.

I found that I had to drive almost 40 miles out of the settlement to a high hill on the roadway north before I could make radio contact with the Whitehorse Detachment. I hauled the 26-foot freighter canoe with an 18 HP outboard motor down from Whitehorse, which was to be my detachment watercraft. I had to haul the fuel that I thought I would need as there was no service station in Carcross, and the nearest gas station was at Jake’s Corner, thirty-five miles east on the Tagish Road out on the Alaska Highway. I made another trip to pick up my powerboat with a 35 HP outboard motor and left my Rambler station wagon in the compound in Whitehorse.

The White Pass & Yukon Route Railway has a train that runs from Skagway, Alaska, to Whitehorse and comes up on the east side of Bennett Lake, crosses the Taku Arm with a bridge, and has a train station in Carcross. The railway maintenance crew lived in barracks in Carcross and were all single men who frequented the bar in the hotel.

There was an Indian Residential School run by the Anglican Church, and their maintenance man was building himself a steam-powered boat in his off hours. On the third day, I was there, I was down at the river to help him launch his boat. I had put my own boat in the water and used my trailer to haul his boat from the school to the launch area. I had built the boat when I was in Newfoundland and had hauled the boat and trailer the 6,997 miles from St. John’s to Dawson City the previous year with only one flat tire going over the bridge in Montreal. I watched him go down the Taku Arm with my spotting scope and binoculars, and when he encountered the waves in Windy Arm, I saw him begin to turn around. In doing so, a wave came over the side and put out the fire under his boiler, and there was no more smoke coming out of the smokestack, just a big cloud of steam. I launched my powerboat and got to him before the boat went into the rocks on the north side. I tied him and towed him back to the safety of Carcross Harbour. Windy Arm is a body of water that is six or seven miles wide where it joins the Taku Arm and about 25 miles long with nine to ten thousand-foot mountains on both sides and is fed by winds coming from the Gulf of Alaska.

There is a grass strip runway airport, and one of the railway maintenance crew had purchased a “Supercub” aircraft and had scared himself. He wanted me to fly with him until he got some mountain flying experience. He had received his pilot training in Winnipeg, where there were not many big knolls in that country, so I had an aircraft available at my pleasure to explore the country and look out for sheep, caribou, moose, and grizzly bears. With the 24-hour daylight, we could do some flying whenever his shifts were over, and the weather was good. I got endorsed on his “Supercub” and showed him some “ass savers” in flying in the mountains. The previous summer, we had a lot of fires in the Yukon, and I went with local pilots as a favor to Forestry in assessing the different fires that erupted and gained a lot of mountain flying experience with well-trained pilots. In the spring and fall, we did photographic missions and took pictures of the migrating caribou so they could assess the health of the herd.

The railroad used to take boatloads of tourists up from Skagway, and then they would take the people on the paddle wheeler, the “TUCHI,” a hundred miles south down the Taku Arm to “Ben-My-Chree,” which used to be a fairly large silver mine until an earthquake trapped nine miners underground and the mine was closed. In the early 20s, it was a thriving tourist destination, with several of the mine buildings converted to tourist accommodation until the stock market crashed in 1929, and the ensuing Depression brought about a slow demise until it was finally closed in 1956. The WPYR Railroad bought it from the estate of Mr. and Mrs. Oscar Partridge. They had originated from the Isle of Man, and in their dialect, it means “Woman of my Heart.”

I got a call from Whitehorse that I was to take a Sgt. trained in handling explosives and a demolition man to Ben-My-Chree and look after some deteriorated dynamite that had been left by the mine when it closed. They arrived in Carcross, and I had been charged with arranging food and accommodation for three people for the boat trip. I rented a big tent and gas stove from the store owner and bought food and fuel for a week, and we headed out for the 220-mile return trip in the 26-foot freighter canoe. As luck was with us, the lake was dead calm there and back, and we all got sunburnt.

The demolition expert decided that there was no way of exploding such a big cache of dynamite, as some of it would not properly detonate and would more than likely have sticks of dynamite spread all over the site. He saved a lot to blow the entrance of the mine shut, and the remaining was taken out very carefully into the deepest part of the lake and gently lowered over the side by the First Class Constable.

Mrs. Partridge had to have had a lot of flowers and a big vegetable garden of about an acre in size with the remains of an eight-foot “Moose Fence” that was overgrown with endless perennial and annual flowers that seeded themselves, as well as lots of rhubarb. That was the first of three trips that I made to Ben-My-Chree that summer. A week or so later, I took one of the Sgts fishing down the Taku Arm, and he caught a forty-four-pound lake trout, which would likely win the fishing derby prize money. The S/Sgt made good use of my freighter canoe at every opportunity to try and beat that fish. I had a sweet spot down the west arm of Bennett Lake where I could go there and be back in half an hour with a 25-pound lake trout for supper. I would stuff it with regular poultry dressing and bake it in the oven, and I would have fish for a week.

The community was divided, with a number of people living in Whitehorse having a summer place in Carcross on the north side of the Taku River. The Aboriginals lived along the water on the south side, and the railroad had a walking area on the bridge over the river. The “Tushi” steam-powered paddle wheeler boat was used to transport hundreds of people up from Skagway. They would board the boat and tour down to Ben-My-Chree, have lunch, and stay over at the lodge there. The train would take the remaining passengers along to Whitehorse and, the next day pick up the boat tour passengers and take them all back to Skagway to catch their tour boat back south.

The local natives would put on a dance and entertainment for the tourists and “Skookum” Jim and “Tagish” Charlie (who were part of the discoverers of the gold that started the Klondike Gold Rush). They would be with a group of the local natives, all dressed up in their native costumes, and perform Native dances and tell stories of how they discovered the gold on Rabbit Creek, which was later renamed Bonanza Creek. I arranged to buy Skookum Jim’s .256 Newton rifle from him and had to pay him then, but I could not have it until after he died. It is one of the many antique rifles and pistols that I have in my collection. Later that fall, I was in Whitehorse and attended a Fish and Game luncheon. Roy Weatherby, the President of Weatherby Firearms, was one of the guest speakers. I approached him after the function and said I had trouble with his sales gimmick of introducing “locking lugs” to the shooting world. He asked if I had a .256 Newton and if he could buy it from me. He said it cost him a pile of money to buy that patent from Newton many years ago. Both of the old timers died that summer and his grandson borrowed the rifle to get some moose and caribou for the big “Potlatch” they planned.

I was standing at the train station when I heard a rifle shot in the settlement. I ran across the bridge and down to the house where some of the partying was going on and saw a native backing out of the house with the rifle still in his hands. I kept telling him to drop the rifle, and he stood there in his drunken stupor. I gave him the opportunity to choose which eye I would shoot him in if he did not put the rifle down. He dropped the rifle, as he was not very quick about making decisions. I handcuffed him to the metal gate and went inside. He had shot another person in the upper stomach area, and there was blood everywhere. He was still alive and conscious, repeatedly saying, “Henry shot me.” I ran over to the hotel, as the wife of the owner was a nurse. She came with me and tried to stop the bleeding, but he died in about ten minutes. I took Henry over to the detachment and handcuffed him with his arms around the thirty-five-foot flagpole right outside the door, as I had no cells to put him in. I wrapped the rifle in a sheet, hid it in my bed, and tried phoning Whitehorse, but the phone was dead.

To get radio communication to advise Whitehorse of the incident, I had to drive 40 miles to the top of the hill, where I could first make radio contact and then drive back. When I pulled into the front of my detachment building, my prisoner was no longer handcuffed to the flagpole and nowhere in sight. He had used the sharp edges of the handcuffs to help him shinny up to the top of the flagpole, but with the inconvenience of the handcuffs no longer helping him, they were hindering him. His handhold gave out, and he slid down the 35 feet and broke his leg on the flagpole support post, which was about four feet up from the ground. I was able to follow the drag tracks of him crawling in the sand and found him hiding underneath the old paddle-wheeler, about five hundred yards away.

I ran back, got the police car, and loaded him in the back seat. I drove over to the railway station, located the nurse, and she strapped his legs together with some short pieces of 2 x 4s right in the car. She used my pants belt and service belt to make sure it stayed secure for the 78-mile trip to the hospital. She gave him a shot to ease some of his pain, and I headed out for Whitehorse. I met the members on the way and filled them in on my situation over the radio and that I was headed to the hospital in Whitehorse. I notified Whitehorse of the current situation and asked them to alert the hospital and provide another member at the hospital to guard the prisoner, as I would have to return to get statements from the witnesses, as I could identify all who were in the house when the chap was killed. I wanted to get the statements before they had a chance to sober up and concoct a story about the events.

When I got back to Carcross and went to take some pictures with the Identification Section, there was no one in the house other than the murder victim. The coroner arrived with the ambulance, and the body was conveyed to Whitehorse for an autopsy. I continued to find people and get their statements. Most everyone I contacted either claimed they were passed out or could not remember what happened, other than the deceased telling Henry that he was not of the Tagish people and would not be accepted as a member. He told him to go back to Whitehorse. When he picked up the rifle by the door and fired one shot, the “Potlatch” had gone on for several days of drinking some of their homebrew made from everything they could get to ferment, with lots of game to eat and lots of fiddle playing and dancing. I had stood back all of my waking hours, and any fights that took place, my presence was enough to calm things down, allowing them to celebrate the funeral of two celebrities of their tribe.

When it came to court time, his lawyer emphasized the poor treatment he had received from the police and his suffering from the broken leg. He was sentenced to a year in jail and was out in six months for good behavior. He later stabbed and killed a mother of five and received a two-year sentence. A few years later, he shot a person near Edmonton, got some white man justice, and received a ten-year sentence. He was killed in a fight in prison.

Trip to the Engineer Gold Mine


Two geologists arrived in Carcross and were inquiring how they could best get to the Engineer Gold Mine. My neighbor told them that it was on the west side of the Windy Arm and that all the buildings associated with the mill were still standing, and the cable towers were still standing. The mine itself was near the top of the mountain. He said it had been closed for possibly thirty years and there were still a lot of old foundations and some small buildings visible above the treeline. He had not made the climb, but you could see the mine entrance and the buildings from the east side of Windy Arm.

They had a touring permit issued by the Yukon Tourist Department, and I rented them my boat to go down to the mill site on Windy Arm. They planned on being on the mountain for 8 to 10 days. On the 7th day, they came to the detachment and told me that they had discovered a cat road that came down off the mountain and ended up about a mile south of the settlement by the railroad by Bennett Lake. It was a good road all the way with no steep climbs. It had obviously been used to haul all of the cable and steel for the towers. The mill had been taken to the site in the winter with horses hauling everything on the ice road. They said that the tailing piles out of the mine were worth processing, as the bigger chunks of rock would not have been able to be put through the crusher of that era and contained lots of traces of gold. They advised that my boat was tied up by the mill. They also mentioned that they had discovered a pile of deteriorated explosives stored underneath one of the old tent frames, which represented a danger if anyone did not know about deteriorated explosives. They said the mine entrance had been blown closed when the mine was shut down and was no danger to anyone. Records showed that the main bunkhouse and kitchen had caught fire during the winter, and a number of people perished from the cold while attempting to make their way off the mountain, which resulted in the mine being closed. I took them down Windy Arm and recovered my boat.

Trip To Deal With Deteriorated Explosives

I contacted the Yukon Tourist Department, and they recommended a contact in the Game Branch in Whitehorse. He volunteered a four-wheel pickup to help me get to the site so I could deal with the deteriorated explosives, and so they could discover another trail near the top of the mountains. They were forever issuing people permits to climb Nares Mountain, which started about two miles out of Carcross, and they promoted it as a 4.5-hour trip, but that was just for the climb up the mountain. A number of times during the summer, there would be a lot of overdue climbers, and I could spot them coming back down the mountain really late in the day with my spotting scope. For those who have not climbed a mountain, it is easily three times as hard to climbdown a mountain as to climb up. Your muscles, with each step-down, are carrying your full weight to a stop without any time to rest, and they play out, forcing you to stop to rest, or your legs will cramp up, causing a great deal of pain and discomfort if you do not rest regularly on the way down.

When the Game Branch arrived, I showed him some of my pictures of grizzly bears, caribou, big horn sheep, and moose that I had taken from the aircraft in the immediate area. I packed enough food and a small tent, and we headed up Montana Mountain. It was a gentle climb up the valley, and as we drove along, he got his packet of snoose (chewing tobacco) and offered it to me. I had watched other people go through the tapping of the lid, taking a pinch of the tobacco, and then putting it into their lower lip. There was a bit of a rough area on the road, and I raised the packet close to my mouth at about the time he was watching me and hit the side of the embankment with the front right wheel. My elbow hit the side window, and most of the tobacco went into my mouth. I must have had four times as much tobacco in my mouth as a normal chewer would have had, and we did not have any water to wash out my mouth. Much of it that I could spit out stuck everywhere in my mouth, and I was overwhelmed by the strong tobacco. He stopped, and I got out, gagged, and coughed, and I could not get it all out, even with my finger in my mouth. I needed only one session of “snoose” to last me the rest of my life.

When we got to the mine, the entrance was on the west side of the mountain with a big pile of rubble rock below the entrance. The beginning of the cable bucket system went on towers down the mountain to the mill, where they crushed the ore and then bagged it for shipment. The remains of the encampment were a pile of rock foundations where the bunkhouse, kitchen, and mess area had been located. There were several tent foundations located in the flat area below the mine, remnants from other geological groups that must have visited the mine to investigate the possibility of reopening it.

We located the deteriorated dynamite, and there were six cases that showed signs of leakage of nitroglycerine on the outside of the cardboard containers, so it would not be safe to transport it anywhere. We just took it out from underneath the tent frame and placed it very gently on top of the tent frame. We went up by the mine opening on top of the tailing pile so that the shock wave would blow past us when the dynamite exploded. I took out my service revolver and, firing from about 300 yards, did not hit the pile. I then took the .308 rifle with a scope, and the first shot set off the dynamite. There was a huge flash that filled the bottom of the little valley, and then the explosion and shock wave went past us without any harm, as we were both lying down, only looking over the edge of a big block of rock. The grass and weeds were stretched out in every direction away from the blast center, and the shards of wood kept floating down from the air for about two minutes.

I had a bad experience in Dawson City when I found an abandoned log cabin on one of the creeks. It was in a narrow valley with about 50 feet of a rock face extending out to the valley with the creek going past, and the back of the cabin was a straight wall of basalt extending a couple of hundred feet. I had gone into the cabin, and it had a calendar dated 1948 and marked off until October, so I assumed it was last occupied in that year. In one corner of the cabin was a pile of four boxes of dynamite. I went outside and saw signs that the nitroglycerine had leaked out onto the bottom logs. I chose to hide behind a big spruce tree that was as far back as I could see the bottom of the cabin, estimating that I was a good 200 yards away. When I fired the rifle, it was utter chaos as the front half of the roof went up into the air and started circling toward me. The shock blast blew all the front branches off the spruce tree and bruised my right arm as they went past me. With the contained area of vertical rock, the shock wave sent all of the logs downhill toward me and stacked them up in front of my spruce tree. The dust and dirt hung in the air for a good fifteen minutes and filled the valley.

It brings to mind when I was stationed in Coppermine. The engineering firm that built the new school brought in enough dynamite to level the site before they began to build. Being engineers, they were not able to figure out that if you take material off a sloping rock, the high part of the excavation would adequately fill the lower portion of the slope. So, they had twice as much dynamite on-site as required. It is very expensive to fly dynamite in and out of the settlement, so they solved the problem by selling the strongly built dynamite storage building, complete with contents, to one of the Eskimos for a dollar. As an added bonus, they delivered it to his yard. Ten years later, somebody broke into the building, and he reported it to the police. An inventory of the building revealed nothing stolen, and he still had all of his caribou and seals in the building. It was in the middle of the settlement with houses all around it.

However, there was a pile of nine boxes of 60% dynamite showing signs of nitroglycerine leakage on the bottom boxes. I took the problem to my Cpl., and he decided that there was no use endangering both of us. We would have one of our wives pull a match out of a box of matches, and the one who got the short match would move the dynamite by himself. His wife pulled out the matches, and about the third layer down, with her eyes closed, she handed me the match, and it was short. We had a brand new Ford ¾-ton four-wheel-drive truck, and I backed it into the building and very gingerly placed the boxes of dynamite in the back. I drove out of the settlement at about five miles an hour and the five miles from the settlement to the airport. I went to the far end of the runway, and the bank was too steep to drive down. The airport is built along the slope that goes down to the ocean, and I figured it would send any tundra and debris toward the ocean with the slope angling that way. I very gently drove about halfway from the runway to the road that went along the shore and offloaded the boxes of dynamite. I put all of the caps into the top box, cut two pieces of fuse about ten feet long, and fused both of the sticks of dynamite, placing them on top of the pile.

I lit both fuses at the same time, immediately got into the truck, and hurried out of there. I drove partway down the Airport Road and stood in the back of the truck to take a video picture of the impending explosion. All of a sudden, the first raven came over me and went directly to the pile of boxes away out on the tundra, a good 800 feet off the runway. Then there were groups of ravens until there must have been thirty investigating that strange pile of boxes. I began to run the video camera, and there was this huge kachung sound. A black cloud appeared above that area, and the big boom sent a huge amount of soil and debris a thousand feet into the air, coming back down over the airport runway.

I drove onto the runway, and to my dismay, there were endless blocks of frozen tundra scattered along most of the length of the runway. Panic set in because I knew the scheduled flight of a Twin Otter was due to arrive about 2:00 p.m. So I parked the truck directly across the middle of the runway and began grabbing the larger, ragged chunks of frozen soil, carrying and throwing them off to the side of the runway. Some of them weighed 70-80 pounds. The fist-sized chunks I could throw off on both sides from where I picked them up. I was over halfway done before the Cpl. came to check on me, having to walk the five miles, figuring the worst after hearing the explosion in the Detachment and not seeing me return to the settlement. We finished throwing the remaining chunks off the runway and then drove the truck down to take pictures of the hole and examine what had happened to cause all of that debris to be thrown onto the airport runway. The hole was a good hundred feet across and possibly thirty feet deep. I understand that it became the drop site for the “honey wagon” for over the next forty years, so I figure it was good planning and engineering on my behalf.


Tagish Grave Sites

When I was in charge of Carcross Detachment in 1965, I got a number of calls to attend the area of the Tagish River Bridge to examine human bones that were found on the river’s edge on the east side of the river.As the water went down different people located the bones at the water’s edge.On the west side of the 18 hundred foot bridge, there is a Native settlement of a number of homes, and on the east side, there is a Territorial parking lotto accommodate the endless number of fishermen that use the bridge to catch five different varieties of fish that come up the river to feed from the Nares Lake about five miles north of the bridge.A few hundred feet back from the parking lot is the ceremonial platform and then the Native grave sites that run randomly out to the edge of the river bank through some pine and spruce trees.The soil in the area is mostly perma-frost and thawing with the effects of the perpetual summer sun and the presence of river water.

The river bank is about 30 feet high from the edge to flow of the water in the river to the top of the bank and it is gradually being eaten away with the high volume of water during the spring run-off.There area number of grave houses with the assorted personal effects of the deceased, and they are scattered amongthe trees all the way out to the river bank.

From the road along the west side of the river, with a set of binoculars, I could see the remnants of at least six graves that have been partially or entirely eroded away.

I had built a grave box and carried a pick and shovel in the trunk of thePolice Car and would gather up the human remains that had been found and put them in the trunk of the vehicle and go over and dig a hole and burry them in a vacant area of the Native graveyard and I had made crosses with a pointed bottom out of ¾ inch plywood that I had paintedwhite, and I would put the date of the reinternment and initial it.This occurred three times in a month and I carried a spare grave box in the trunk for that purpose.I made repeated trips to the Native graveyardevery time I had occasion to drive in that area to try and prevent people from pilfering the items that were in the grave houses.I was also patrolling there to check the fishermen for their Yukon Fishing license.I had a great number of Americans whoworked on building the Alaska Highway and were coming from Alaska or going to Alaska that knew of the good fishing spot of the Tagish River Bridge.I could introduce them to a Yukon Fishing Licence.

The grave site at Tagish is about a 20 - 30 mile lake trip from Carcross to the Tagish River, and locating the grave site was a two-day trek up and down the east shore of the Tagish River.Members in the past had never been able to locate the gravesite.I believe they drowned in 1899 or 1900 from memory.I was able to locate the old Tagish Post, and the horse stable was dug into the ground (I guess to keep the horses warm in the winter and save on building materials) because only the doorway and some timbers were still left at the scene and there wasa perimeter of stones where the main building was located.The grave site was located almost two miles south ofthe Post on a slight hill.The river bank is about 40 feet high from the water's edge and the graves were located in a nice poplar glade with simple deteriorated wooden crosses.I spent another day cutting the trees around the site and removingall the weeds in the area and plantingsome local flowers on the grave site, erected the headboards that I had routered their names and date of death, took a few pictures, and left.

I no more than got back to the Detachment in Carcross and picked up my mail.The first letter I opened was the direction to dig up the members and have them buried in the graveyard at Dawson City.I conned one of the Auxiliary Members and a new recruit that were stationed in Whitehorse for a good fishing trip; if they would help me on the digging trip.We caught several big lake trout and camped there in the perpetual daylight and we camp fried and ate a lot of fish.We spent hours digging.I was in one grave, and the other two dug in the second grave.We continued to dig because you could see the disturbed soil lines on the sides of the graves.I dug in one grave, and they took turns shovelling in the other. I managed to get down to the first casket ahead of them as I shovelled a narrow hole when I did not locate the casket above the six-foot mark. We removed the remains and put them into smaller caskets that I had built, and they took them back to Whitehorse to begin the transfer to Dawson City, where they were again interned.

The Tagish bridge is 1800 feet long, and the Yukon Government had seen fit to build a campsite on the east end of the bridge as it was a favourite site for fishing off of the bridge as there were about half a dozen varieties of fish that were available to the anglers.Unfortunately, there was a Carcross Tagish Native grave site a few hundred feet back from the border of the campsite and all along the river bank.Every year, more of the graves were disturbed by the river banks being washed away, and human bones would be turned in at the Detachment.I would return them to the site and bury them further back from the river bank.There was a lot of vandalism to the grave houses, and their ceremonial platform had not been maintained over the years. 

 The local natives had fallen several tall spruce trees over it to afford it some protection.I was making regular patrols to try and protect the area, and as the water receded, I would search the river bank for new bones andbury the bones that I located downstream from the grave site before they were discovered and turned into the Detachment in Carcross.

About this time, Allen Innis Taylor, a retired ex-Northwest Mounted Policeman, arrived at my Detachment.He was hired on by Indian Affairs to locate the sites of all of the known Native Gravesites in the Yukon and had old correspondence describing the different locations.I told him to get in the Police car, and I would drive him over to Tagish, and we could be back in an hour, as I knew where it was located and visited it numerous times.He indicated that the only way of locating it correctly was to travel by water, and he had permission from the Commanding Officer in Whitehorse to use RCMPequipment and manpower to assist him in locating the graves.I knewAllen InnisTaylor and his wife from my posting at Dawson City. 

I had escorted his wife to the Mental Health Unit in Whitehorse during the previous winter and had attended their residence several times when she had gone violent on him with her dementia attacks.During his service, he had been seconded to look after the dogs when Scott made his trip to the South Pole, and unfortunately, he had been beaten by Roal Amundsen by five weeks, and Scott and four of his crew perished on the return trip.I had listened to many of his tales over coffee as he often visited the Detachment at all hours of the day and night.

I told him I was not going by boat because there was a wind cloud on Nares Mountain, and we had to cross Windy Arm to get to the Tagish Lake and Tagish River before it ran into Marsh Lake.He showed me his authorization papers, and I still refused to take him there by water when we could drive there in half an hour.He left in a huff, and I watched him as he got in his car and drove directly to the hotel.About 20 minutes later, I got a call fromthe Commanding Officer. And I was to take Allen Taylor by boat and assist him in any way possible.I told him we could drive there in twenty minutes to half an hour andI was very familiar with the gravesite and patrolled there regularly.As I told Mr. Taylor, I had been to the Indian grave site many times and investigated the damage caused by the tourists using the adjacent park that was about a hundred feet apart.I told him that I could see the wind clouds on the top of the mountain in that area and figured it was not safe to go by boat, and he replied to honour his wishes as he had old papers that describedthe location from the waterof the Tagish River from a particular bluff of trees.I told him that the bluff of trees was where the Native village of Tagish was located on the west side of the Tagish River.The native graveyard was across the Tagish Bridge on the other side of the river, and I had been there quite a number of times dealing with the human bones that had been washed into the river from a grave that had been buried too close to the eroding bank and damage caused by the tourists at the park that was possibly only a hundred feet away from the graveyard. 

Needless to say I was not that pleased with the directions of the Officer Commanding of the Yukon Subdivison.I locked up the office and left a note on the door of my detachment building saying that I was going to Tagish by water and to phone Whitehorse if they needed a policeman before I returned.I left the number for the Whitehorse Detachment on the note.

I picked him up at the Hotel coffee shop and took my two fuel tanks, fishing gear, and rifle down to the boat.We had a 26-foot freighter canoe with only one 18 HP outboard motor on it at the time.It had a six-foot beam, and I knew it would take some really big waves as I had been caught out on Bennett Lake with ten-foot waves.There was nothing in the boat other than a big 30-foot square canvas tarpaulin that I used to cover the boat with when it was not in use. I took no food or camping equipment other than my fishing rod and rifle because I anticipated being back in 8 or 9 hours and would wet a line while he inspected the grave site.I knew the bluff of trees that wereon the west shore, and it was where the Native settlement of Tagish was located and was at the end of 1800 foot Tagish River Bridge.

 Windy Arm is a body of water that is possibly15 miles long and three to four miles wide with several barren rocky islands about three-quarters the way across the mouth of the arm but slightly up into the Arm.The Tagish people called it “Todezzane,”meaning wind blowing all the time. The wind was from the south, and we were intent on going directly east.The big rollers were getting rather difficult to handle before we got closer to Windy Arm.As we got closer to Windy Arm, the winds increased considerably and I had to head into the wind and waves to prevent from being swamped.I figured I could make it to the islands and then turn down the wind at an angle to clear the Arm, but the wind increased to possibly 90 + mph, blowing a froth of water into the boat from the top of the cresting waves, and I had to continuously bale the accumulated water at the back of the boat.I managed to make it to the lee of the islands and decided we would have to beach the canoe as we could not have enough gas to keep it going almost full speed and all the time angling slightly across the open water of the Windy Arm.Until the wind subsided, I would not be able to turn sideways in such a strong wind to be able to turn around and head back to the safety of Carcross.

I had the tarpaulin tied at the front and then underneath the front twart and then above the next two twarts and tied along the starboard side and back over most of myself by the rear seat to prevent some of the water from entirely soaking me.Mr. Taylor lay down across the front seat under thetarp and out of the wind as the canoe has a six-foot beam, and he used the extra life jackets as a pillow.For over two hours we headed into the wind and slowly angled across the Windy Arm and managed to get into the lee of the most northerly rocky Island and made it to the stony beach. 

We hauled the canoe up on shore using the paddles and two ores to protect the canvas and painted the bottom up on a sharp gravel beach.About the time we got it turned over, it began to rain heavily.We used the canvas to lieon and stop some of the wind and rain from coming into our shelter.I tried fishing when the rain stopped.You could cast almost all of my line out downwind and managed to catch one lake trout and a four-pike in short order.There was no wood on the island, not even small branches or even chips of wood, just an 80-foot spire of rock that was several hundred feet long and the sharp rock and gravel beach on the north end, so making a firefor warmth was out of the question.

I later learned that the Outfitter,whohad his residence on the North shore, had been watching our attempt to cross Windy Arm with the aid of his binoculars and then saw us land on the island and phoned the Whitehorse Detachment to advise them that we were safe on the island as he recognised the RCMP boat with the crest and the RCMP lettering that I had made for the short planked in the area on the bow of the 26-foot freighter canoe.

We ate raw fish for the next three days, and I had to listen to Allen Taylor recall all of his stories at the top of his voicebecause of the howling wind and rattling of the canvas.We were most uncomfortable as the lake water never really warms up, even in the middle of summer, even with the 24-hour daylight.When our clothes dried up, it was a little better, but the air over the lake was still uncomfortably cold, and the wind was coming down off the glaciers on the mountains to the south.There were no soft spots under the layers of canvas on the rocky beach with absolutely no sand, and the only comfort was the padded, lumpy life vests that we used for pillows.

On the fourth day, the wind subsided just before noon, and we turned the boat over, dragged it back into the water, installed the motor, and headed out for the Tagish Bridge. In less than an hour, we were tied up there.He inspected the Native gravesite, took a number of pictures, and made a few notes, and we boated back to Carcross. I went directly to Whitehorse and met with the Officer Commanding to thank him for my having to put up with Allan Innis Taylor’s company, and hemade light of the subject by saying that he would not deduct my wages for the four-day camping holiday that I must have enjoyed.

 

1987Edmonton Tornado – F4 Tornado – Black Friday

I was one of the RCMP members that attended the Emergency Response Meetings and helped make plans of how to respond to different maladies in weather, flooding, heavy snowfalls, fires, earthquakes, and how to deal with possible fires at the four refineries and pipeline leaks and power outages.In mid-July, the topic of a Tornado was on the agenda.It was taken fairly lightly by the people involved at the beginning of the meeting as no one had ever experienced a tornado.As a teenager, I had experienced “Hurricane Hazel” back in Ontario and was very familiar with the devastation that occurred from just heavy rain and strong winds.I remained troubled by the lack of preparedness of our community officials, with the endless devastation that resulted from the tremendous amount of water that came down and power outages.

I cautioned those attending that we should take a serious look at planning to have a total plan of preparedness put together.We started with pages of phone numbers of all emergency centres, television, radio, hospitals in the area, ambulances, fire halls, towing companies,heavy lift and equipment services, aircraft and helicopter contacts, as well as names of personnel that wasin charge as contact people.Having four refineries in the immediate area of Sherwood Park and Edmonton, with fires in the refractors and huge storage tanks of propane, gasoline, and diesel on-site in the area.A system of code had to be set up to ensure the security of the call was established so that the fires could be extinguished because of the huge costs of shutting down and starting up a refinery.Once we began to accept the immensity of establishing contact phone numbers and personnel, the meeting extended into evening hours.

 Arrangements were made to have a copy of the Emergency file distributed to the Edmonton Police Department and all of the Detachments in the Edmonton area.I remember that the booklet of Tornado Preparedness arrived on my desk on Wednesday.Just before 1:30 p.m. on Friday, I was listening to the local radio, and I was advised that the warning of a thunderstorm with the possibility of large hail was broadcast.And Ilooked over at the Tornado Preparedness booklet in the filing basket.I was in the middle of planning to look after the parking and traffic control for the Commonwealth Games that was to start on Saturday. 

Just before 2:00 p.m., one of the members on patrol reported on the radio that there looked like a tornado coming out of a very dark cloud just south of Edmonton. He said he thought it was heading our way, and it looked serious and directed us to go outside and to look out of the Detachment and see what was happening.I got in the police car with my camera,took a quick trip,and took a few pictures.After that, Ireturned to the office and began to make phone calls.I got in touch with the different refineries and gave them the code and the warning of the impending tornado that was headed north just on the outskirts of Edmonton.One of the refineries questioned me if I knew how much it would cost to shut down and start up a refinery, and I told him that he was about to find out just how expensive it was because he was to begin shutting it down right now.I phoned the radio stations, TV stations,hospitals,Fire halls, and ambulances and turned the list over to our radio dispatcher and asked that she continue making the calls from where I left off and have another secretary contact everyone of the members and have them come to the office ASAP.

I got in the police car and made my way down the Sherwood Park Freeway to try and stop the traffic from driving into the tornado as it looked like it was about to cross the freeway.I parked the police car obliquely across two lanes of the highway, angled slightly, got out in the driving rain, and attempted to flag people off the freeway and onto 17th Street as the black twister was about to pass over the Freeway.There was a large number of the big garbage bins that had been lifted up into the cloud and were banging around against one another with deafening bangs.I just avoided being run over by an Orange van and followed right after that with an Oldsmobile station wagon with a woman driver whowas obviously looking at the storm ahead and not my exaggerated arm movements and with me in a florescent orange raincoat.

I managed to get a line of cars stopped and told the drivers not to go any further along the freeway.I moved up onto 17th Street to try and prevent the traffic from paralleling the tornado as the path was uncertain at that time, and it began hailing as soon as I got a couple vehicles stopped.I got a lot of static from one of the drivers as he wanted to go into his office in the industrial area and retrieve his petty cash and float.I told him that if he moved forward, I would shoot the tires out on his vehicle, and he continued to cuss me and question my mother’s marriage.The hail stones were getting bigger, and I got hit with one on the shoulder that was the size of a tennis ball and ran for the car.I just got into the car, and the rattle of hail on the roof was continuous.The next thing I knew, there was a really big bang on the front of the vehicle, and I figured that the upset driver had thrown a big rock at the Police car, and I got out to assess the damage and deal with him.

As I went to the front of the police car, the entire grill area was smashed out, and on the ground was a huge chunk of clear ice about six inches across that had struck the car.I decided to move south on 17th Street to get out of the hail, and just as I was underway, the entire roof of one of the warehouses went up into the air and went behind me and the next time I saw it, the entire roof was like a leaf and swooping down right in front of me, and I looked in the rearview mirror as it crashed into the industrial area.I turned around and went back north on 17th Street, and the tornado was lifting holiday trailers out of the yard on the south side of the Freeway;they would spin around faster and faster until the body part flew apart and the metal frame, axles, and tires would come crashing back to earth.One after another, theywent up a couple hundred feet and got the same treatment.The trucking firm on the south of the entire building, beginning with the office, then the two hundred feet of warehouse, went up into the cloud, and a loaded truck and trailer went up about 100 feet and circled in the air and went back down over by the fence of the trucking firm yard.There were endless pieces of lumber flying around, and I found out that three people were killed in that lumber company yard on the south side of the Freeway.Quite a number of industrial buildings got an exaggerated lean and then disintegrated and went up into the black cloud as it moved forward just a few miles an hour.The base of the swirling mass where the destruction was taking place was about a mile wide.As it moved north, I went into the industrial area to see if I could locate anyone that needed help.

I located the orange van that almost hit me about half a mile from the Freeway.It was in five or six pieces, and so was the driver.I found the Oldsmobile station wagon about half a mile away, and all four tires were flat, so it must have come down from a considerable way up.The woman driver was still in the vehicle with her hands straight out, still holding onto the steering wheel.I tapped on the window, and she let the window down.I asked her if she was all right, and her response to me was, “Would you look in the back and see if my golf clubs are O.K.?”She was in total shock.I assisted her into the police car and took her to one of the ambulances, and her only injury was a broken collar bone from contact with the seat belt.She had to have been up in the cloud for ten minutes because the tornado was only going forward at about ten miles an hour.I drove into the industrial area and discovered one of the warehouses that had trucks that used radioactive canisters for cameras to examine the welds on the pipeline.The entire building was gone, leaving only the cement pad, and obviously, the radioactive canisters had gone up into the cloud, so another major concern was broadcast, and it was decided that the entire area would have to be closed until those canisters were located.For the next two weeks, the entire area was closed to the public until we had the Canadian Army with Geiger counters and members searching abreast until searching the entire area and until they all were located.I had my camera with me the entire time, and it resulted in me recording 178 scenes of destruction that havebecome one of my many albums.

One of the funny situations comes to mind. I was approached by one of the known hippies, and he stopped me on the road andquestionedme on who was going to pay for the six-inch square of a window pane that was the only damage that his house had received during the tornado.There was a Karagana hedge next door to the house, and then there was a blank cement pad several hundred feet square of cement where there had been heavy machinery and offices of a complete machine shop, and this piece of intelligence was concerned about his window pane and who was going to pay to have it replaced.

Before the tornado, there was a guy whowas trying to bum gasoline and had gone into the trucking firm with his empty five-gallon container and they put him off by telling him that they only had diesel fuel for their trucks.He had gone back to his car and had his plastic container in front of him as he sat watching the tornado.The company staff wasin the office looking at the destruction of one of the buildings at the steel plant across the field, and all of a sudden, a four by eight feet sheet of quarter-inch steel came through the windows at the other end of the office, and they headed out to go into the pits in the garage.This gas bum was sitting in his car right in front of the office watching the tornado, and the long rafters from a roof truss company across the road went up in the air, and one of them came around and went through the back window of his car and through the seat and into him pinning him and the gas can against the steering wheel.A female member heard him screaming and called me to assist in getting him out of the car.We summoned an ambulance, and when they arrived, I helped the attendant pull the 2 X 4 out of the back window and they loaded him in the ambulance, and the female member, for some unknown reason, went with him in the ambulance to the hospital and left the police car without the keys in the parking lot.He died in the hospital.

Another member in the area discovered a man whohad been holding onto a Coke dispensing unit when it was crumpled by the cement tankers,landedon top of it and was trapped and yelling his head off.The member wanted me to dispatch a wrecker to see if we could rescue him.I went there after the wrecker arrived; the member was distressed bythe size of the wrecker that I had sent.I discovered that there were four loaded cement tankers piled one on top of another and the man was held by the buckle of his belt trapped in a crumple of the metal coke container.I crawled in and cut the back of his belt with myjackknife, and he crawled out as I did.It took several big cranes to lift and put those cement tankers back on their wheels.

The path of the tornado turned just before it went into the refinery area and sort of followed the North Saskatchewan River.It had just missed two forty-foot round propane storage tanks.Talking with refinery executives, they told me that had just one of those tanks had been damaged and caught fire, the possibility of the fire using up the oxygen to burn that amount of fuel; they figured that the survival area from lack of oxygenfor all residents and animals would possibly be about 60 miles radius and over a million people would have perished.

I interviewed the railroad workers and they had been in their line shack and had been eating their late lunch, and they saw the tornado pulling the rails and ties out of the ground just up from their shack as well as large gas lines that had been buried five feet into the ground.They all went into the change area and wrapped their arms around one another, holding the handles of the lockers.Then, the roof was torn off the building, and when they looked up, there was a 150-foot fuel storage tank circling right over their heads.And was slowly turning and then crashed about 100 feet away from their shack.All five of them were unscathed. 

To provide exact details on the Edmonton tornado, it was on the ground from 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., and its winds made it a category 4 on the Fujita Scale.It travelled in an erratic swath of destruction for 30.8 km or 19.1 miles with a width of 1.3 km wide and was estimated to have caused 647 million dollars of property damage.It killed a total of 27 people and injured over 300.It is recorded to have lots of tennis ball-sized hail, and I can attest toone huge chunk of ice that took the grill out of the Police car.It is considered the worst and most destructive tornado in Canada’s history.In the two weeks, we spent looking for those radioactive lead canisters, the entire area was closed to the public; as we searched, it was hampered by thousands of unidentified pieces of anything and everything, and we managed to find all of them with no radioactive leaks.I managed to record 178 pictures of the record of the destructive forces and trail of damage that it left behind that I still have in one of my albums.

Some of the damaged filing cabinets were found in fields as much as 60 miles from where they left the trucking firm, and some of the big metal bins made a 20-mile journey.Two sets of washers and driers were found with the delivery material inside them some 60 miles away from the trailer park near Fort Saskatchewan, where the majority of the people lost their lives.There were all sorts of queer things that you encountered.I was checking the two-story office building and grabbed the handle of the door, and the frame and the door fell in.The entire wall of the outside of that portion of the building was missing, and yet the pile of paperwork was still on the desk neatly stacked and filing cabinets were on the ground outside. 

One of the taxi drivers had a client whowanted to be dropped off at a building when the tornado hit with the idea of getting in a basement.He left, and the driver decided to stay in the vehicle.The bricks on the wall of the three-story building came down on top of the cab, and we had a six-inch high taxi cab driver.A lot of the parked cars that were about 500 feet from the Freeway left the parking lot and were damaged a lot, but were parked one after another out on the right lane of the Freeway, and a lot of them were severely damaged.Places wherefull pallets of cement were taken out of the missing back wall of a warehouse, and right next to where the cement went missing werepallets of light zone-a-light was left still stacked there alongside where tons of cement in bags went missing.The turning tower, where the transmission line went north alongside Edmonton.It had four cement stanchions that were ten feet in the ground and five feet in diameter.They were pulled out of the ground, and the metal of the tower and half a mile of cable werewound tightly around the twisted steel of the tower. 

One of the welding and manufacturing companies had their welding rods that were stored in heated cabinets.I went into the building to check for bodies and the winds inside the building had taken the welding rods out of the cabinet, and the twelve-inch posts that supported the second story down the middle of the room looked like a mad porcupine as the welding rods were sticking in ever side of those post for a good portion of the room.There were many parking lots where vehicles were piled three and four deep if there was a building nearby.

I could go on for many pages as the photographs area good reminder of the carnage as a result of the tornado.They help bring to mind all the areas that we searched the area looking for those radioactive canisters and a reminder of the funny incidents that happened as a result of the devastation that it caused and some of the pictures depict some of the more curious incidents.It is hard to believe the suction that was required to lift those around 40-pound lead containers, and some of them were scattered almost a mile from the industrial building that used to contain them.The forces involved in lifting an empty oil storage tank that was fifty feet tall on the sides and 150 in diameter and carrying it over half a mile and a couple hundred feet in the air, the forces are unbelievable.

There were full filing cabinets that were deposited in fields anywhere from 30 to 45 miles to the north of where they were picked up from offices in the Industrial buildings.The fact it was on the ground for over an hour, and the path was almost a mile wide with the destruction of buildings and property, was so extensive.When it got to the trailer park up by Fort Saskatchewan, so many people were killed in that areabecause there were no basements to hide in, and the trailers were not tied down in any manner.Our search was hampered bythousands of shrouds of metal and building material covering the area of its path, and debris spread for a mile beyond the devastation area that came back down from the cloud.

Auxillary Constable Program

In 1987, I was handed over the Auxiliary Constable program by the officer in charge of the Sherwood Park Detachment to see if we could make it work. It had fallen into a social gathering at their convenience. I had the pleasure of working with all of the Auxiliary Constables, and Fred and Brian were, in my opinion, two of the best. It had become a social club, and many of the Auxiliary members enjoyed the prestige of being associated with the RCMP but did not participate in active patrols; a couple had never even been in a police car with a member.

I began a training program that included qualifying the Auxiliary members in the use of the revolver, shotgun, and rifle. Even though they were not carrying any firearms, they would be confident in their use and capable of providing assistance if the situation proved necessary. For a while, we had weekly training programs lasting a couple of hours, focusing on dress and deportment and what was expected of them in assisting the members and being the second person in the police vehicle. I had the members ofthe Highway Patrol prepare lectures on any subject they felt would be valuable to Auxiliary members. Both Brian and Fred devoted endless hours of their own time, and I would consider them to be more like policemen than many of the recruits coming out of training at Regina. They were seasoned adults who could focus on catching criminals and displayed a unique sense of understanding of violators.

They knew the area and the “rounders” in the community and were a great source of information about what was really taking place in the community. I consider it an honor to say that I enjoyed all of their participation and fellowship until I retired in 1994. I recognized that their trusted service was all on a voluntary basis. I used to host a social event once a month at our acreage, and the Auxiliary members and their families were part of the barbecues and sporting events on the lawn for all the kids, with the cars out of the garage and the music, turned up. These are good memories, and I am proud to say that I enjoyed their voluntary participation in making the community a much safer place to live.

