My first memory is helping my grandfather by turning the handle on the fan that blew air into his forge. I would have been about five years old at the time. My father, Robert (Bob) John Dunn, was always away working for the Canadian Pacific Railway (C.P.R.) on the signal gang all over Ontario. They were tying one side of the rails together by drilling holes in the flange of the rail, placing a bronze plug in the holes, and tying the rail together with a copper wire so they could use it to signal if the line was not occupied by another train. He lived away in railroad accommodation and would only come home on weekends if they were working close enough for train connections.

My mother and I continued to live with my grandparents on their farm, which was located about six miles northeast of Coldwater, Ontario. My mother, Mary Dunn, was the thirteenth child raised in the family, and every one of the older children tended to her every need, so she never learned to cook or clean the house.

My grandfather, John Parnham, was born and raised in Ireland. After the Potato Famine in Ireland, he went to sea and eventually became a captain on a passenger liner, plying the route from Europe to Canada. He met a Dutch teacher on her way to settle in Canada. They agreed to marry, and he set her up in accommodation in Halifax, Nova Scotia, before piloting the ship back to England. He retired as captain and returned on the next available ship. They got married in Halifax and boarded the CPR railroad to see Canada, where they wanted to settle. They traveled as far west as Winnipeg but didn’t like the flat, endless prairie and decided to go back to the Maritimes. When the train stopped to take on water at a place called Lovering Station in central Ontario, they got off the train to stretch their legs. They saw fields of grain, big maple trees, and big spruce trees and decided this would be a good place to settle. They got their luggage off the train and walked away from the station. They encountered the North River school, went in to visit, and she was offered a job teaching on the spot. As they walked toward the town of Coldwater, they saw a sign at the gate that read “Help Wanted.” They went in, and a very senior farmer offered him a job and accommodation in a large brick five-bedroom house. He ended up buying the farm, and they settled there.

On my father’s side of the family, my grandmother was the last of eleven children born to John Mount Stephen. I have traced that side of the family back to 1735 in England, where John Mount Steven was the son of Lord Mount Steven. John got a Scotch kitchen maid pregnant, and his father exiled him to Canada, making him one of the first “remittance men” to arrive there. He was granted title to 500 acres, which was later called Mount Steven, about nine miles east of Coldwater, Ontario. My grandmother married John Albert Dunn, an “Aladdin Lamp” salesman with a horse and buggy with accommodation built on it. They had four children, and my father was the eldest. My grandfather was a bit of an alcoholic, and one night, while driving home, the horse was going full speed and struck the side of a bridge, killing him. She then married Clayton Blainey, the local butcher and brick maker in Coldwater, and they had one daughter, Sheila.

Grandma Parnham taught at the North River District School for many years, between having kids and remaining involved in school affairs for most of her life. She supplemented all of her children’s education and had a classroom with endless books and a blackboard in the back kitchen of the house. They raised thirteen children, and my mother was the 13th. She tutored every one of them in the classroom in the back kitchen. I was her last student, counting to a hundred, and I knew all of the “A-B-Cs” by the time I was five years old. She arranged for me to go to grade one when my birthday was August 28, and the school started on September 1st, which was in 1945.

My grandfather was looking at retiring and arranged to turn the farm over to my mother and dad. When my father didn’t stop working for the C.P.R. signal gang and came home, he made a list of things for me to do for the next week. He and Grandpa had a big discussion about not wanting to work the farm, and Grandpa told him he would have to find accommodation for his family. By this time, I had a sister and two brothers living in the house on the farm. Grandpa took the farm back, and my father bought five acres and a tarpaper three-room shack about a mile and a half out of Coldwater and three miles from where he worked as a signal maintainer at Medonte.

When I was fourteen, Grandpa had a heart attack, and the rest of the family was unable to help with running the farm. I was detailed about looking after the farm and livestock. I managed to plant oats, barley, wheat, and buckwheat and put up hay in the barn for the livestock. He had 26 cows, three Clydesdale horses, and 200 sheep, as well as six pigs, a dozen chickens, and the same number of geese and turkeys. In the fall, I had to cut and run the binder through the cropsand stook the crop, and neighbors came over to do the threshing and put it all in the granaries. In the fall, I would get up at 4:00 a.m., milk the 26 cows, and carry the milk to the back kitchen at the house. Grandma would do the separation and feed the fowl. I would catch the bus at 7:00 a.m. to go to high school in Orillia, come back home on the bus, and again milk the cows, feed the pigs and fowl, and put down hay for the cows and horses. The sheep were out in the pasture. Grandpa decided to have an auction sale, sell the farm, and move to a house they bought closer to Coldwater for medical attention. He gave me the money from the sale of all the extra animals that had arrived while I was looking after the farm. I used that money to buy a Harley Davidson “Electro-glide” motorcycle that was all fancied up with saddle bags and lots of chrome.

During the war, many farm boys went off to war and did not return. The government brought over many Dutch people and their families to replace some of the lost farm workers. They were committed to working on the farm for one year. This brought many Dutch kids to the local school, and my grandmother was employed to teach them English. If I recall correctly, there were only myself and another kid who spoke English in grade one, while the other eight spoke Dutch. It was a two-room school with only one teacher. My grandmother taught grades one to four in one room and the other four grades in the other room, as well as teaching the Dutch kids to speak English. I remember walking with my grandmother from home on the farm a mile and a half to her daughter’s farm. She usually stopped off for coffee or tea, and I walked with her kids the other mile and a half to school, then reversed the trip. During the winter, if there was a lot of snow on the road, my grandfather hitched up his Clydesdale horses to a sleigh with a big hay rack and a bit of a shelter to break the weather. He took all the kids to school along the route and came back at the end of the day to pick us up.

When it was time to go into grade two, the Dutch workers had completed their year of farm work. Some of the families went back to Holland, while others went to the cities to get jobs they had been trained for. I was placed in grade three because there were only two kids in grade two, and the same thing happened: I missed grade four and was put in grade five in my third year at school. This gave me a head start in my education, and I finished high school when I was only fifteen years old. My father, like his father, was a bit of an alcoholic and had only a grade-six education. He said he would not support any more education, so I was out in the workforce. The only jobs available were heavy-duty labor, as nobody wanted to hire a 15-year-old skinny kid.My first job was working hand-unloading gravel and sand into the big rocks around culverts along a new piece of highway. When the highway culverts were finished, so was the job. My next job was breaking up the cement sidewalks on Main Street in Orillia. We broke the cement with sledgehammers into small enough pieces to lift them up to someone who placed them in the truck's box. They were trying to cut down on the noise and didn’t use jackhammers, so the blocks of cement were placed, rather than thrown, into the truck. 

We worked 10-hour days and half a day on Saturday and received a total of $45.00 by Saturday noon. We paid $10.00 a week for morning and night fare to a chap who was a mailman in Orillia and lived in Coldwater. He didn’t work on Saturday afternoons, so another worker and I were trying to hitchhike a ride back home without much success. His dad had died earlier, and while we were trying to catch a ride, the Catholic Church up the street chimed one o'clock. He said he should go up and see the priest to get his father out of purgatory. Not knowing much about purgatory and not belonging to the Catholic Church, I went with him. I sat at the back of the church, listened to the priest mumble along in Latin, and watched him turn the envelope with his entire week’s pay over to the priest. We went back to the corner, and he was skipping happily but with no luck catching a ride. When the bus came along, we hailed it, and I had to pay for his fare since he had given the priest his entire pay. I thought about how hard we worked for 55 hours of backbreaking labor and how he turned that money over to the church. It didn’t sit well with me.

After three weeks of that job, my uncle Mel offered that I could stay in his apartment in Toronto, which was by Malton Airport and next to the Institute of Technology. He suggested I might get trained for a better job. He drove a truck for Miller Paving, hauling asphalt wherever they had contracts, and then steamed out the tanks before hauling salt slurry from Goderich to Toronto. I signed up for electrical engineering and found it quite interesting. I was at the college for almost six months. One of the teachers was from England and had a Cockney accent. We had great difficulty understanding him most of the time and he wasn’t liked by everyone in the class because of his accent and reluctance to repeat what the students couldn’t understand. Four of us decided to play a joke on him.

We had a hand-crank generator in the classroom that could build up an electrical charge and send an arc a good six inches between the balls at the top. He would display and talk about something on the board, then usually go over and sit on a big padded chair behind his desk in a raised area of the classroom and respond to questions from there. We ran two wires to each side of his padded chair and over to the generator, which was behind a curtain at the side of the classroom. One of our group manned the generator, and another member directed him from his side of the classroom on when to crank up the generator from behind the curtain. The irony of the situation built up because someone would ask him another question when he was just about at his chair, and the generator would be started. He would return to the board to explain further and then head back to his chair, only to be asked another question and go back to the board. This back-and-forth routine continued at least half a dozen times before he pulled out the chair, bent forward at the desk, and pulled the chair forward underneath him, sitting solidly down. He immediately bolted upwards, taking the desk off the raised area, and he went with the desk. The investigation into the incident resulted in four of us being expelled from the Institute.

I got my next job operating a big D8 cable blade Caterpillar, leveling dirt on an overpass being built in Toronto, and when the overpass was completed, so was the job. I returned home to Coldwater and took a course on building firearms. The test at the end of the course involved givinga block of steel, a hacksaw, a drill bit, and files to build a miniature pistol. You passed if it fired a .22 short cartridge at least once. There was no spring steel provided, so I used a big elastic to provide power to bring the hammer forward when it was held in the vice. I fired it several times remotely before taking it to the instructor and passed the course. I still have it in my collection.

My father was an alcoholic and came home drunk one night. My mother had neglected to put away the dishes after washing them, and he was going to get her out of bed to put them away. I came downstairs from upstairs and met him in the hallway, telling him I would put them away. He came back out of the bedroom, took the dishes out of the cupboard, and smashed them on the floor, shouting at my mother to clean them up. He pushed me back when I said I would clean up the mess, took a swing at me, and ducked, causing him to hit his fist on the refrigerator. I moved out of the corner, and he took a run at me. I dropped and sent him over me and into the wall. I left the house and went to the bathroom, which was a path and a two-holer. On the way back toward the house, I could make him out with a 2x4 in the shadow of the house. I talked with him and told him I was leaving home. I had my suitcase packed and was not going to put up with any more of his drinking. I went around him, entered the house, picked up my suitcase, and met him on the front steps. He said if I decided to come back, here was his railroad pass. I took it and left, staying with my grandmother in town and paying her for the room. I never went back home for three years.

I made quite a bit of money playing “pea pool” at Joe’s Pool Room in Coldwater, but I could see there wasn’t much of a guaranteed future with that as a vocation. Two of my acquaintances were planning to go west, as one had gone there the year before, and said there were always farm jobs available in Saskatchewan with food and accommodation supplied. We pooled our money, bought a ’49 Studebaker vehicle, and had to buy a battery to see if we could get it running. We brought along all the camping gear, blankets, a tent, pots and pans, and other gear we could round up and headed west.

Neither of them had much money and were awful cooks, but the first long day ended when we got stuck in the sand on the new construction near a little town of Ipsaly in Northern Ontario and burned out the clutch of the vehicle trying to get out. The Trans Canada Highway was being built at the time, and there was a construction crew camp right where we got stuck. We went to the camp to tell them that we hadbroken down in the middle of their sand trap, and it turned out my uncle was the foreman. He said that he had lost his water truck driver, scraper driver, and cat driver because they couldn’t stand the mosquitoes, black flies, and other bugs. He said he heard I was working driving a cat in Toronto when he was home last week and asked if I wanted to drive a cat. So our next jobs were handed to us, and they had a good cook to make it even better, though it didn’t help with the bugs. My job was pushing dirt across about half a mile of muskeg. I drove the cat while the other boys drove the scraper and the water truck. I pushed the dirt delivered by the scraper, and my friend watered it down while I ran the cat back and forth a few times, packing and leveling it.

We phoned the Studebaker dealer in Sudbury and arranged for the clutch to be delivered to . We lifted the vehicle with the blade of the cat using some chains and replaced the clutch during our off hours. We finished the roadway across the muskeg, and the boys decided they wanted to go into Dryden and visit the bar on our day off. They went to the bar, and I went to the donut shop and walked around the boat docks. They were both drunk when we left Dryden, and I drove back to camp. When I came to the muskeg crossing, I stopped because it didn’t look right; it was all black, and we had filled it with light-colored sand. The entire two weeks of our work had sunk, and the muskeg was a good five feet high on both sides. We went around the muskeg area and back to camp to break the bad news to my uncle. We spent another month hauling dirt to fill the five feet of water over our previous road and made it wider and higher. When that section was complete, he wanted us to go to the next job he had lined up. Both of them told him they had jobs lined up in Saskatchewan for the harvest, so we headed out again.

When we got to Winnipeg, it was raining heavily, and we had to replace the windshield wipers. Near the Saskatchewan/Manitoba border, we got stuck in the mud in the middle of the road, thanks to the prairie gumbo. There was a camp right where we got stuck, and they were building the four-foot Trans Canada Pipeline. We asked if we could get one of the trucks or cats to pull us out. Since it was raining heavily, he couldn’t convince any of the cat drivers to go, and when one of the trucks tried, all it did was spray a lot of mud onto the windshield. I was talking with the foreman, who said he was having trouble keeping welders because of the mud and welding the pipe over the open pit. If the men fell into the trench and weren’t strong swimmers with the welding gear on, sometimes there was ten feet of water in the trench, and there was nothing to rescue them with on the job site. He asked if any of us could weld, and I told him I had learned some in high school and helped a friend whose father had set him up in a welding shop when he got a big order. I worked for him to try and complete that project. He asked what we were welding, and I told him it was filing cabinets. He said if I had learned to patch holes in that light metal, then I was a welder, and I could come to work in the morning.

The other two didn’t know how to weld, and I told him that we had just come off a job building the Trans Canada Highway, and I was the cat skinner on that job. By this time, there were three more vehicles stuck on the roadway near ours. He told me to take one of the cats and see if I could clear a layer of mud off the road and pull them out. About twenty minutes later, my partners were off to Regina. It was simple shifting over to stick welding because they had the correct rod and the right heat setup for the pipe thickness. They had a government inspector come around almost every week, and you had to weld a quarter-inch thick couple of plates together. He would put them in a vice, and with a big wrench, he would bend them back and forth. If they broke on the weld and not on the heat line, you picked up your lunch pail and were not allowed to continue welding on the pipeline. That made it so you earned a “B” Class pressure certificate, and I have been burning iron ever since.

Wherever I went with the Force, I didn’t mind volunteering for the tough welding jobs just to keep my hand in practice, like welding grouser plates onto a set of Cat tracks. In the first three years of construction (1956–58), workers installed 3,500 kilometers of 48-inch pipe, stretching from Sherwood Park, Alberta, and began delivering natural gas to Regina, Winnipeg, Toronto, and Montreal. The problem for a fifteen-year-old kid was that when the pipeline was finished, there were 1,500 welders looking for work, so welding as a career choice was not considered.

I headed out to Regina and got my first job at the home of the City of Regina’s chief architect, who had a butler and a nice young French maid. I was the gardener, living in the tool shed at the back of the property. She was frightened of the Natives and asked if I would accompany her on a walk in the neighborhood. When we got back, the police were there and found some of the household silver under my mattress. The policemen realized what had happened, and it ended up that I was fired, as well as the butler. They could see that the English butler was involved with the French maid and didn’t want any competition.

About four days later, I was having supper at a Chinese restaurant when an Aboriginal man came in, quite intoxicated and wielding a straight razor, demanding money. Someone in the back must have called the police. I had done a lot of fighting at dances and took boxing in high school, so I figured I could knock him out because he was really drunk. I wrapped my coat around my forearm in case I didn’t knock him out. I walked up behind him and said, “Don’t be stupid,” wanting him to turn around before I struck him. He swung around and cut my upper left arm with the straight razor. I hit him and knocked him out just as the police came through the door. They had seen what happened from the outside window, and one of the policemen had been at the stolen silver investigation earlier in the week. They called another car to come for the unconscious drunk, and when they arrived, they took me to the hospital, where I got my arm stitched up. The policeman said I should be a policeman, and when I told him I was only fifteen years old, he told me to come back in three years as they were always looking for big guys who could handle themselves. That idea sort of stuck in the back of my mind.

I got a rooming house and went to the unemployment office, where there were only farmhand job opportunities inplaces I did not know. I was sitting there, as it was raining outside when a lady came in and walked right over to me and asked, “Are you looking for work?” I replied affirmatively, and she told me to come with her and get in the car. She asked me my name and where I was from when we got underway, and she said her husband needed help getting the crop off as he had too much land to handle without a lot of hired hands. She asked if I knew anything about farming, and I told her that I was born and raised on a farm back in Ontario and knew for a fact that I was not going to be a farmer.

So, for the next year, I worked atMcDougall Farms for $100.00 a month. Every payday, there was a family discussion that he should give me more money, as I worked twice as hard as any farmhand he had ever had. Being a true Scotsman, he refused, and she would end the discussion by saying she would make it up to me. When she died, the first thing in her will was, “The Mustang goes to Frank.” The family delivered the car, and I am now the proud owner of a 1982 candy apple red Mustang GT. I can honestly say it was only driven by a lady to church to get groceries and to have coffee with her friends. And she certainly made it up to me.

They had three boys and a girl, and about five years after I left the farm, they had another boy. We have remained friends with the family over the years. It seemed every time we went across Canada and back to visit relatives in Ontario, we either stayed at the farm or, more recently, with their daughter. I did the wedding pictures for two of her daughters.

I used the railroad pass to take me next to Vancouver and got a job as a summer laborer with the Fish and Game Department. We went over to Long Beach on the west coast of Vancouver Island. We traveled in a one-ton dual axle truck, and the initial job was removing all of the “draft dodgers” and “hippies” who were camped in their hovels among the big logs on the beach. They loaded what they wanted to keep, and the rest went into the fires they had going. We transported them to the ferry terminal at Nanaimo, as they were going to open it as a Provincial Park. The road over there was hardly more than a goat trail, and the bridges were just two big logs with a small flat area on top. I walked across them because they were wet and it was raining.

When we got back, I was assigned to the Animal Science Section, initially banding eaglets in high tree nests. This involved two of us climbing the trees with spurs and rope slings—one person watched for the eagle parents, and the other banded the eaglets.

The next job was to help the Director shoot and tranquilize grizzly bears that were catching salmon. We would weigh them, take blood and hair samples, and check their health. One particularly big bear was watching us while we handled him. I told the doctor that he would be really dangerous when he woke up and that he hadn’t given him a large enough dose. The doctor disagreed, so I took off my coveralls, put a stick through the sleeves, and hung it in the willows down the trail from where we had been dealing with the bear. We all headed up a very steep, rocky area to watch what happened. The bear got up, looked around, and tore down the trail to the coveralls, swatting them several times. He then went down the riverbank, came back, and chewed and swatted the coveralls lying on the ground. After that, he didn’t question anything I suggested.

Our next assignment was going up to the Queen Charlotte Islands (currently known as Haida Gwaii) to catch and band the small Sitka deer unique to the island. They are about the size of a large collie dog and have horns that they know how to use, especially if they were caught the second or third time. We would hang fish nets in the bush and then go through the bush, trying to scare them into the nets. We would then weigh them and follow the same routine with blood and hair samples. They were not tranquilized, so we had to hold them down or contain them and try to take them out of the net. Several of the bucks were quite aggressive about being handled and used their horns offensively, slashing at us with their front feet. We were there for six weeks, and it rained day and night for the entire time. We lived in tents, and the only thing available to burn for some heat was cedar, which sparked continuously. We had a fire going in front of the tent, and some of our clothes were hung up inside the tent to try to dry for the next day. Every bit of my wardrobe had numerous holes burned in them.

When we got back to Vancouver, the mammologist had his clothing replaced by the Department, and because we were summer students, we received absolutely no compensation. My wages for those six weeks didn’t cover half of the wardrobe I had to replace, so I decided I could no longer afford to work for the B.C. Fish and Game Department. I had had enough of the west coast and the rain, so I brought out the railroad pass and decided to go home, as my sister had written that my mother had been diagnosed with serious diabetes. When we got to Rogers Pass, there were two slides from all the rain, and the train was stranded between the huge amounts of gravel that had come down over the tracks. We sat there for a week while food was flown in by helicopter to feed the passengers.

When I got to Sudbury, where you change trains to head towards southern Ontario, I went in and got a ticket to head for Halifax, Nova Scotia, as they would figure I was a sissy coming home so quickly. It was a beautiful trip with all the fall colors. When I got to Halifax, the job market was non-existent. After a week, I finally got offered a job on a dragger fishing boat. The pay wasn’t much, but we were promised a share of what we were going to catch. I started to realize it might not be that great a deal when I helped carry groceries for five people, including a 75-pound sack of potatoes, a big bag of onions, four turnips, a small bag of carrots, a square cardboard container of lard weighing 75 pounds, and a 50-pound bag of flour.We left Halifax and let out the net shortly after leaving the land. Our first haul was mostly junk fish, and a lot of it went into making a never-ending pot of fish stew on the back burner of the stove. We caught a few cod, and only the tongues and jowls went into the pot. I was instructed on how the fish were to be cleaned. It seemed that the seagulls must have heard the winch cables start because they congregated around the boat, and I hadn’t seen one since we left the harbor. I watched the fish-locating instrumentation; it was an art to set the depth of the net where the instrumentation showed a greater congregation of fish and their approximate depth.

After three days out on the Grand Banks, we were hit with some really heavy seas, which obstructed fishing. We had to head directly into the big waves, causing the boat to slow going up the wave and the net to drop, and then come up too fast going down the back of the wave. On that pull, there was little or no fish in the net. We then had about a week of reasonable catches and were busy cleaning and salting the catch, as there was no refrigeration aboard this boat. We encountered another storm, and no nets were set out for five days.

We had three good days of fishing and then got the message that another big storm was coming. The Captain decided we would wait out the storm in the harbor at St. John’s, Newfoundland. Other captains had the same idea, so we had to wait in line before we could load up the salt he ordered. It was a matter of going off the boat and a couple of hundred feet on the dock to the warehouse door, then halfway back through the huge building, hoisting a hundred-pound sack of crystal salt onto your shoulder, sometimes wrapping your arms around it, and walking it back to the boat. Three of the crew were asked to haul all that salt. We waited three days in line and were not allowed to leave the boat. There were possibly 50 boats anchored in the harbor waiting out the storm, with fishing vessels from ten different countries as, at that time, there was only a four-mile offshore limit. One of them was a Russian factory ship, a couple of hundred feet long, with five different trawlers tied up to it, all anchored in the harbor, waiting out the storm as well.

We headed out to sea, but the waves were still too big to set the nets. We headed towards Halifax, and after the sea calmed, we fished for a couple of days, though not with much success, always heading for the Maritimes. When we got back to Halifax and were about to get paid, the Captain did not offer any of the money for the catch and deducted most of the food that we had on board between the three of us. I looked around Halifax for a job for four or five days and then decided to head back to Ontario. I went to the train station and found out that my father’s railroad pass had expired, so I decided to hitchhike. I had almost a dozen different rides before I got back to Toronto.

I went to Miller Paving’s yard and found out that my uncle was coming back to the yard and was unloading the salt at the terminal in Toronto. I was going to wait for him, as it was a Friday, and I could hitch a ride the last 100 miles up to Coldwater. As I was walking around the yard, a guy hollered, “Back that truck into the wash rack!” I figured he was hollering at someone on the other side of the building. He hollered even louder with a few swear words at the beginning and end, and when I didn’t move, he yelled, “Do you not understand English?” I replied that I did understand English and headed towards the truck. It was a Freightliner with a tank and pup trailer attached.

I had to move the unit back and forth a few times before I figured out which way to turn the steering axle to make the pup begin to turn toward the wash building. After another dozen shifts back and forth, I finally got it aligned with the entrance of the wash rack building, backed it in, and shut it off. When I came out, I hollered over to him, “I suppose you want me to wash it as well?” He came over in a huff, obviously to give me a dressing down for not doing what I was told when he hollered at me. He said, “You don’t work here; what are you doing in the yard?” I told him I had checked in at the office and was waiting for my Uncle Mel to return so I could get a ride with him up to Coldwater. He said Mel had been with Miller Paving for more than twenty-five years and asked if I was looking for a job. I told him I had just returned from Nova Scotia and hadn’t had time to look for a job. He asked if I had a Chauffeur’s License. I told him I had a “Farm Help” license to drive a truck from Saskatchewan and an expired Ontario driver’s license. He said, “Get into that ‘bobtail’ over there, and we’ll get you your license pretty quickly. If you can back a truck, trailer, and pup into the wash rack on the first try, you can work for Miller Paving. I’ll have it washed for you come Monday morning.”

I spent nine months working for Miller Paving, covering the runs that my uncle Mell had previously handled, including many jobs up in Northern Ontario. I literally lived in the truck. I picked up pillows from old couches abandoned on the side of the highway and used them to make a comfortable bed across the passenger seat area. I ate at truck stops, took no weekends off, and was paid a bonus based on a ton-mile rate. I took one weekend off and had a delivery to Northern Ontario. Since home was only a few miles off Highway 400, which went through Coldwater, I decided to park the unit alongside the house and drive my bike to a party back at the lake. It rained heavily all weekend, and when I returned home on Sunday night, the loaded tanker and pup had sunk into the dirt beside the house because there were no eavestroughs on that side of the house. It took three big tow trucks to get it out without damaging the tanks or the house.

On another trip to Northern Ontario, while coming down a long hill into North Bay on the way home, I had Jacob’s Brake really heated up, and the exhaust was popping down the hill. As I was going down the main street, a convertible Metropolitan with a nice-looking blonde in a mini skirt pulled up alongside the tractor unit. I dumped in the clutch, revved the engine to high RPM, and engaged Jacob’s Brake, which really popped and rattled, causing her to stop right in the street. As I looked back in the mirror, the golden letters of the MAHAR shoe store's glass were falling onto the sidewalk. There had been a man sweeping the sidewalk who must have noted the license number from the back of the pup. By the time I returned to the office in Toronto, they had phoned the insurance company, and the records of my driver’s license showed that I was not yet 25 years old and, hence, not covered by insurance. As a result, I was no longer working for Miller Paving.

I then drove the old car I had bought from my uncle's home. It was badly in need of an engine overhaul because every time you filled the gas tank, you had to add two quarts of oil. I bought a big Oldsmobile “Rocket” 455 cubic inch engine and mounted it in a 1956 Ford sedan. The problem was that if you weren’t careful with the acceleration, it would twist the driveshaft off. The first time it happened, it was at the back by the differential and only resulted in no power, but the next time, it was at the front, and the driveshaft went back under the rear wheel, nearly turning the car over before I could stop it.

One night, at the drive-in, I was the second car leaving and soon became the first in line heading west. There was a raised area in the road and a cut for the railroad on both sides. Knowing there was a train scheduled around midnight, I made a cautious approach. When I saw it was clear, I accelerated quickly and, obviously, twisted off the driveshaft. It got caught on the railroad tracks, ripping the back wheels, trunk, gas tank, and part of the frame of the car. By the time I recovered from the impact and looked in the rearview mirror, sparks were flying from the back of the passenger area, dragging along the road, and I saw the gas tank was on fire, followed by a big explosion.

I retrieved the engine and mounted it in a 1958 Mercury with a trailer hitch. I loaned the car to a buddy to haul some stuff up to his father’s cabin at the lake. Unfortunately, a brick truck, going too fast for the curve, went head-on into my friend’s car, killing him and destroying the car and my big engine.

I then got a job working for a local survey company and worked my way up from an “axe-man” to a “chain man,” then to a “transit man,” and eventually to running the crew, handling all field notes, drafting, and drawing plans for a cottage subdivision. We eventually worked on contracts for the Department of Highways.

We completed a job with closing within aminute angle on a 16-mile closure. This brought a crew of office staff to our office, who wanted to see all of the field notes. They saw that I had made only two temperature measurements at the beginning and end of each entry, with some measurements being a few thousand feet apart. Normally, dozens of temperature corrections would be required for coefficient expansion and contraction due to the change in sunlight. I explained that the reason for this was that we did the centerline of the roadway at night, and the two measurements were taken at the same temperature. We conducted the survey using flashlights, could see cars coming for miles, and used short cement nails in the pavement for each measurement, illuminating the string of the plumb bob with the flashlight for the transit alignment angle readings.I explained that we had placed the holes to set up the new 18 holes on a golf course. Instead of paying for the survey, our boss made a deal for us to have free use of the golf course for the summer. We changed our work schedule to work from 8:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m., slept until 10:00 a.m., and then hit the links until near supper. This went on for most of the summer, and it certainly improved our golf scores and made the survey work a lot better, as we could produce a higher level of accuracy.

We were working in the Windermere area of the Muskoka District, and when winter came, there was a lull in surveying work. Our boss was intent on laying off the crew, so I took a job looking after the fires at the Windermere Lodge. There were four buildings, and I had to keep the furnaces filled with cordwood. I had a great room and ate the food from the freezers, preparing it in the big kitchen. When the lake froze, there was no snow on the ice for over two months. When it did snow, the wind mostly blew it clear, so I entertained myself by skating for miles almost every day.

The chap who owned the lodge came up to check on me and the buildings. He entertained me with war stories and mentioned he had license number "One." He planned to switch the floats on the Cessna 185 after buying skis on his next trip. He said he had a license restriction and needed someone with him on all flights who could land and take off, and he offered to teach me how to fly the airplane.

I started a fire in the hangar, and since it was not insulated, it only took the chill off the inside of the building. He directed me to install a big winch system above the aircraft that he had previously purchased. It was an electric winch system with a control on a long wire. I built a big platform, hung it from the rafters, and hooked the winch cable to the rafters at the top of the ceiling. The winch pulled itself up to the platform. I had loosened all the bolts on the pontoons, and when he arrived, we had the pontoons off and the skis installed in a couple of hours. He used the winch to move them to each side by spiking a pulley to each side of the hangar. He figured it would take him several trips up from the city, and on the same day, the aircraft was sitting on the ice in front of the hangar. We fueled it up, checked the oil, and he taught me what to look for during a walk-around inspection of the aircraft.

I spent the winter learning to fly, and that will make another story. I kept the fires going and went back to work surveying when the staff returned to the lodge. We completed two more contracts for the Department of Highways, and I had finished my application to join the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, awaiting notification on when the next troop for training would form.

In the fall, we received a contract to survey and lay out the lots for a 400-lot subdivision north of Port Severn, around a couple of lakes and abutting the Severn River. My crew and I worked out the plans from aerial maps, staked out the lots, and drilled holes by hand into granite rock to cement the pins in place. We contended with Massasauga rattlesnakes in the scrub juniper by wearing snake boots and using cheap metal fish rods with about four feet of steel rods. When we heard the buzz of the rattles, we would thrash the bush until we killed the snake, minimizing the risk of bites from these highly venomous snakes. I drew up the subdivision plan, made individual lot plans for all 400 lots, and registered them at the Land Titles office. The boss got a lot and another one overlooking the lake. When it was all complete, he signed each plot plan and decided to be generous by presenting each member of the crew with a $25.00 check. I returned the check with my resignation.

The corporal who processed my application advised me to get in really good shape before training to make it easier. We had a big snowfall early in the fall, so I strapped on a pair of snowshoes and took my .22 rifle. I went hunting around the fields and bush for the next three months, spending 10 to 12 hours each day getting in top shape. As the snow deepened through the winter, I broke new trails, and the effort increased. I received a call instructing me to make my way to the Headquarters building in Toronto on February 9, 1961. I was sworn in and issued a train ticket to Regina, Saskatchewan.

 

Learning to fly and getting my pilot license

I got my pilot's license back in 1958, and 66 years later, I still have it as long as my medical passes. I have knocked a hole in the air for just under 7,000 hours as pilot in command, endorsed on 19 different aircraft, with the largest being the twin-engine Douglas DC-3.

I applied to get into the RCMP AIR Division, but nobody was retiring, and they were not buying any more aircraft until I aged out. I figured that I would get my helicopter license to improve my chances if they acquired helicopters. I got fifty hours of helicopter time and practiced doing autorotations from a couple of thousand feet by dumping the collective, which allows the rotor blades to build up speed. When you get close to the ground, you pull it back up, and the energy in the blades allows you to stop your descent and land softly. I was able to do it from 1,000 feet and land softly, with enough energy to lift and turn it slightly.

I suggested that we should try one from 500 feet, but he said that would only give you two choices. I asked him what my two choices were, and he told me possibly the hospital and the morgue. He explained that the only way you could survive is if you have about 165 miles an hour forward speed. I said that if the engine quits at 500 feet, you only have those two options. I flew back to the base and decided that I would stick with the fixed-wing and do no more flying in command of a floppy-wing aircraft.

Working at the Windermere Lodge on Lake Rosseau and keeping the fires going just meant putting a couple of logs in the furnaces of the three big buildings at night. In the morning, I would have to put in four or five logs, and they would last the whole day, so it did not take much time or effort. The owner of the Lodge and I became good friends, and we got his Cessna 185 transferred over from the floats to skis in one day. He decided to stay over and teach me how to fly. He had to have someone with him who could land and take off to accommodate the restrictions on his license. He supplied me with several books to read about flying and navigating.

At night, he entertained me with some of his First World War stories about flying over France from England and animated “dog fights” with the Germans. He spent World War II teaching flying for Canadian Air Force personnel and airmen from the allies at several bases in Canada, as well as some fighter training in England. He had bought the Windermere Lodge and, over about twenty years, built it up from accommodating just six guests to currently accommodating over 75 guests with the three buildings. Some people stayed most of the summer year after year at a reduced rate as they required very little cleaning of their rooms and used the facility as their summer cottage with all the amenities. He had written several books on flight instructions, and I was able to read them. He did not have a second copy, so when I got my pilot's license, he wished them returned. I ordered the flight manual “From the Ground Up” and still have it.

We did an oil change on the aircraft, and he showed me how to run the blow pot to get the engine temperature up under the insulated engine cover. He had wing covers that we had to remove so that we did not have to remove the frost buildup on the upper surface of the wings, as it dramatically reducedthe efficiency of the wings. Without the light wing covers, you would have to clean the wings by roping them with two people the entire length of both wings. It would take two people to do it properly. After getting the temperature up on the gauge in the cockpit, he fired up the engine and went about explaining and demonstrating all of the controls, as well as doing a very extensive walk-around and checking the control surfaces for freedom of movement and allowable movement. The aircraft had boards placed crossways under the skis so that they would not freeze onthe ice surface. He had shown me the day before the easy way of accomplishing that with wooden pry boards and where to place them to the best advantage. The lake had frozen over in a glare condition, and we had just a little bit of snow; the wind had kept it clear all winter. I had entertained myself byskating for miles almost every day, and I had done some ice fishing, catching pickerel, pike, and bass to augment some of my meals.

I got in the passenger front seat, and we taxied out onto the lake. He made a big issue about setting the altitude and remembering the exact altitude of the ice surface of the lake as he pointed out the ice surface acts like a big mirror and reflects the sky. The same thing happens with calm water, and you could come in for some very hard landings when you thought there was still a hundred or so feet of air when you contacted the surface of the water or, in this case, the ice surface when you thought you had another hundred feet to descend. He turned into the wind, and we took off. He explained the best climbing attitude, speed, and engine RPM to accomplish the best climb and attitude of the aircraft, then reduced the engine RPM back to cruise when we got to the desired altitude. 

He explained the difficulty with the ice surface reflecting the sky and not being able to determine the surface of the ice without taking that information from the altimeter. He did the first landing, and I was allowed to do the take-off. He had warned me about the precession of the prop when the tail came up and began to fly, how to watch the airspeed and anticipate the tail coming up, and the application of the right amount of rudder and aileron to keep it straight. He said it would be critical when you have just half of the runway width to keep it out of the lights during an airport take-off. He coached me down for the landing. Getting to the ice surface with the reflection of the sky was difficult to determine, so I kept a sharp eye on the altimeter before beginning to round out the descent. I watched the airspeed and kept it just above the stall speed, managing to get it down with a very slight bump by paying a great deal of attention to the altimeter. He allowed me half a dozen take-offs and landings, and they got smoother with each one.

He had put a clothes hanger wire around the axle on the left side and a hook out alongside the ski before we took off from the lodge. He took the red handkerchief from around his neck and threw it out the window, and we watched it as it went down to the ice surface. He said anybody can land and take off an aircraft, but the challenge comes when you do it in the right place. He swung around into the wind on his handkerchief, laying on the glare ice, and watched the altimeter until he was just a few feet off the ice surface, concentrating on aligning the left edge of the ski on the red dot on the ice. It took three attempts before he managed to hook the handkerchief. He cut the power and coasted to a stop. I got out and retrieved the handkerchief, ensuring it was peaked up on the ice and out of the way of the draft from our take-off run a couple of hundred yards to the side. I climbed into the right seat as he had not abandoned the left pilot's seat. He said that you had to know where both sides of the aircraft are when you get close to the ground to see if you know where the left ski is on touchdown.

We took off and circled downwind. When I turned into the wind, I could see the handkerchief from a long way back and made a straight-in approach. I touched down way ahead of the target and bounced over it, missing it on that pass. I pulled up, gained altitude, and came around again. This time, I could see the shiny marks left by the rudder on the bottom of the skis. I could see the nose of the ski on my side and adjusted my alignment over what I considered the distance I had missed on the first pass. I caught the handkerchief on this pass. He said, "I guess you know how to do a spot landing when you beat me by one pass from the right seat." We coasted to a stop, and I retrieved his handkerchief. We took off and toured the lake, spotting a pack of eleven wolves at the far end of the lake where they were finishing eating a deer in a small cove out on the ice. He said that he had a 30-30 rifle in the trunk of his car, and we would be back to get those buggers tomorrow as he could sell the hides to the tourists in the summer.

He pulled up to altitude and said I could take us home. I had spent the better part of the winter skating all over the lake, memorizing most of the lodges and big cottages, so it was easy to head directly to the Lodge. He was surprised that I could fly directly home after circling around on the lake for almost an hour. We landed, fueled the aircraft, and tied it down at the dock. He said we would take a couple of blankets to lay down on the ice and a couple of sheets to cover up with. He would circle behind the wolves, scare them out onto the lake, and I could shoot them for him. The very next day, we flew to where we saw the wolves. They were around another deer killed back in the bush. I was placed on the ice about half a mile offshore, and he took the airplane and did a bunch of circles behind the wolves. Eight of them came towards my blind and passed within about seventy-five yards of me. I shot five of them, then had to reload and managed to get the sixth one. The other two were well out of range for the 30-30. We tied them all together with a long rope and towed them back to the lodge on the glare ice.

We spent the next couple of days skinning the wolves in the furnace room, salting the hides, rolling them up in sheets, and putting them in the big cold storage reefer by the kitchen. We dragged the carcasses with the airplane back to where they had killed the deer out on the ice, figuring that the wolves would clean them up. Three days later, we flew over the area, and it was totally cleaned up.

We flew six more days off in different directions from Rosseau Lake, and I was able to impress him with my navigation skills until I had 20 hours of pilot-in-command recorded in my flight log. I had worked doing survey work and Department of Highways surveys in the area, studying road and topographic maps to do quotes on different contracts, so I was familiar with most of the Muskoka Lakes area. He went back to Toronto after a month. When he returned, he brought the exams for me to complete, and on his next trip, he brought me a shiny new pilot's license. I went back to the survey job in the spring, then got the call to join the RCMP and was off to Regina for training. I heard that he died in Toronto, and I did not find out about it for two years when I was back in Ontario on holiday and went to Toronto to look him up.

I did not have any opportunity to get any flying in other than as a passenger in Air Force Avro Lancasters during searches. They had two of them stationed at Torbay airport in St. John’s, Newfoundland, and they serviced them in Halifax, Nova Scotia. We used to bum a flight over to Halifax, return four days later, and tour the Maritimes while we were there. Most of the members stationed in Newfoundland were from the Maritimes, and a bottle of “Screech” rum ensured a free room in most of the parents' spare bedrooms, making it a reasonable three-day holiday that came up every second month if you could schedule it.

I ended up organizing observers for the search missions for lost hunters and some over-the-ocean searches for lost boats or boats in distress. The aircraft were set up with bubble windows along both sides of the fuselage, usually with seven crew members, and liked to have eight observers. When someone reported seeing something, the observers had a mic to the cockpit. Then all hell broke loose. They immediately pulled up with a number of “g” forces, killed two engines on one side, went full bore, and the two on the other side were feathered. Your stomach contents were forced up your throat, then the dive back to the supposed spot. This all started as they cruised at 200+ miles an hour. Most of the observers did not volunteer for the next search flight after a few of those maneuvers, and I was looking for more observers to be available for the next call-out.

I did some flying when I got to the Yukon and gained a lot of mountain flying experience, helping out the government flights in assessing different forest fires. I did a lot of photography in Dawson City, taking pictures of the caribou migration and doing herd counts when they went over into Alaska in the spring and their fall returns to see what the health of the herds was. When we were in Watson Lake, I organized a flight school to come up to train a dozen pilots. The flight school came up from Edmonton, and I helped out as they brought two aircraft up. One pilot returned, and I helped with the cross-country training. All twelve of them got their pilot's licenses. Then, I purchased my own aircraft when I was transferred to Fort McPherson and flew it all over the North. The longest cross-country flight was from Fort McPherson to my hometown of Coldwater, Ontario, about 90 miles north of Toronto. By the time I got back to Fort McPherson, I had 10,000 miles under the wings. There were a lot of planned ups and downs when it flew at 114 miles an hour and had four hours of fuel on board.