For most of my life, I had been hunting and fishing, and when I went to Newfoundland, you could shoot one caribou. With the proliferation of introduced moose, you could shoot three moose with your one license as they were trying to reduce the moose population. I shot a lot of ptarmigan, ducks, and geese. For a while, I was doing a lot of skeet and trap shooting and won for all of Newfoundland and went to Nova Scotia to compete in the Maritime finals. I won the competition and the first prize, a double-barreled Beretta “perreli” shotgun that I had never fired for skeet, and a fully engraved German shotgun for the Trap competition. When I was being interviewed by the television station at the end of the shoot, the interviewer questioned me on how I could take the competition with a full choke barrel. I responded that if you point a Browning in the right place, you are sure to win. About two weeks later, I received a gold tie tack of a Browning shotgun from the president with a letter saying that the televised interview got a lot of coverage States-side, and they could not get that sort of advertising no matter how much they paid.

I competed in shooting when I was in training, and my name appears on the McBrine Cup for the highest cadet score. I assisted the firearms instructor in helping some of my troop become proficient with revolvers and rifles. When I was in the Army Cadets, I won the .22 rifle competition for Eastern Canada, which qualified me to go to Bisley, England. I have a badge for the “highest score in the unit” that I have on my shooting jacket. We were using .303 Lee Enfields and doing a run-up from 1000 yards to 100 yards and firing five rounds at each yardage.

When we were in training, there were a number of members who had joined from the Newfoundland Rangers and the Newfoundland Constabulary getting their indoctrination training, and I instructed a few of them. When I got transferred to St. John’s, Newfoundland, I was appointed to be the Musketry Instructor for the “B” Division. I would load up the “Pop & Dogger” range in the old 16-passenger van and drive to the individual detachments, locate a gravel pit in the area, set up the range, and conduct the annual shoot so that they did not have to leave their detachment area. When I went to the Yukon, I was appointed to do the same thing.



During the annual shoot over the years, I got four different certificates signed by different Commissioners for shooting “Possibles” with a rifle and revolver. To explain what a “possible” is, everyone is familiar with the “bullseye” on the target. Within the “bullseye,” there is a “CX” ring. To qualify for a “possible,” all ten shots must be inside or touching the CX ring. I got two of them framed, and it cost me $60.00. The others are in some of my collection of goodies. When I was in the Yukon, we had a friendly competition with the Alaska State Police. Every other year, we would go to either Anchorage or Fairbanks, and in the opposite years, they would come to Whitehorse, and we would host them. It was not fair competition because we also had to compete on their “drinking team” as their vice squad took us around to the different bars. When we arrived, their show of the night was started. Five liquor establishments later, we had to be on the range by 9:00 a.m., and we still managed to get the highest scores both in the Yukon and Alaska.

Before the Emergency Response (ERT) team was started, I was on the “Sniper-Counter Sniper” team, and we had to submit a crow target once every two weeks. Failing to submit your target fired at 250 yards meant you were no longer on the team. We were firing the Detachment .308s with a four-power scope. One of the members was ex-military, and his scores were always better than mine. I went with him to where he was shooting, and he was shooting at about a hundred and fifty yards. I invited him to come and shoot on my range, and he said it was too far. I got out the tape, and we measured it; it was two feet over the 250 yards. He moved the cardboard box back two feet, and at the end of the month, he didnot bother to submit his target. I competed representing the Force at a great number of rifle and revolver meets and usually got the highest score.



When I went to the Yukon, the Staff Sergeant retired and took over the Fish and Game Department. He was intent on making big game hunting a big business for the “Outfitters” and wrote letters to all of the big game magazines, rifle makers, and archery manufacturers offering them a free walking hunt for one person. He canvassed the members to become guides, as we all had our first aid and were interested in hunting. They had ten horses and the camps for firefighting. I volunteered and guided Fred Bear of Bear Bows to a record Dall Sheep and the owner of one of the Sports Digest magazines to his Dall Sheep. He invited me down to Las Vegas to get my Desert sheep, and I could say that I had my “Grand Slam” as I had already had my Dall sheep, Rocky Mountain Bighorn, and my “Fannin,” which is a cross between the Dall sheep and the Bighorn. I went to Vegas, went out to his ranch, and by ten o’clock in the morning, the head and horns were at the taxidermist. The hardest part of that hunt was to avoid hitting all of the hikers that were in the hills.



Your Yukon hunting license entitled you to shoot a moose, six caribou, a deer, a sheep, an elk, a buffalo, a spring and fall grizzly, and the same for two black bears. There were always the nuisance bears at the dump and those that came into the settlement and were aggravated by the locals shooting them with their 30-30s and had to be destroyed. Having the guide's license, I got in touch with my father and invited him and my next-door neighbor to come to the Yukon for a once-in-a-lifetime hunt. I made arrangements with the only guide that I would bring his herd of horses out of the mountains if I could take my father and friend on a hunt on the way out. I sent my father an airline ticket from Toronto to Whitehorse. The day before they were about to depart, they got a map out and decided that it was too far, as neither of them had ever been out of Ontario. I was alone flying in, packing up the outfitter's camp, and bringing his horses out to Mayo. I was limited in the number of big games that I shot, only by the number of people to whom I could give away the meat because I had no means of storing it. I was living in barracks and did not even have a refrigerator and only a hot plate to boil water to make tea and coffee and heat up soup. When I was in Dawson City, the two single members were having our meals at the hospital and paying for them at a real good price. That was when they closed the Herschel Island detachment, and Ottawa decided that they would move all of the rations by police plane down to Dawson City and put the single members on rations. A lot of it was four and five years old, and a lot of the cans had burst in the aircraft at altitude.

About that time we had the Commanding Officer come for his summer holiday under the guise of doing an inspection. We cooked him up some porridge and served him bacon that was mostly fat and some dried eggs and powdered milk from the whole garage of supplies. We gave him the menu of what was planned for lunch and the pork and beans and bully beef and eight-year-old Christmas pudding for dessert. He declined, saying he was taking the Cplout for lunch. He went back to Ottawa, and a week later, we were not on rations, and the memo directed us to take it all to the dump. We notified the locals and stacked it at the entrance to the dump, and it quickly disappeared.

Each year, I shot a sheep and goat, and I usually shot the six caribou and gave it all to the senior Aboriginals living in the community. I went moose hunting with the local outfitter, and you usually passed up the ones that were in the willows below the road because of the difficulty of getting them to the vehicle. We came upon three bull moose in a willow patch below the road, and he said I could take the one with the big set of horns as he just wanted some moose for the family for the winter. We shot two of them. I struggled to getthe quarters to the truck and then the head, horns, and hide. I would lash the load onto the pack board and then lay down into the shoulder straps and roll over and struggle to my knees, make my way to my feet and to the tailgate of the pickup, and then unleash it and pull it up into the bed of the truck. 

When we got back to Dawson City, I weighed it on the Canadian Freightways scale, and there were1,880 pounds that I had taken eight trips to get to the pickup. The horns were 72 inches across, and it was measured by a Boone & Crockett representative.And I had the record of the largest moose from 1965 until someone got a moose in Alaska in 2013 that was two inches wider. I loaned the set of horns to the hotel in Watson Lake, and the hotel caught fire and was completely destroyed, and my record set of antlers was destroyed in the fire.



I fished with great success during my life and hunted most everything and kind of game animal in North America. I have caught a bluefin tuna weighing 850 pounds and over ten feet in length and I caught and released a striped blue marlin off Hawaii and a 40-pound lake trout. The largest char that I caught on a rod and reel was over 27 pounds, and I netted over a ton of char for dog food when I was at Coppermine. I ran dog teams for three of the eight years that I was stationed in the North, and we were expected to fish for most of the dog food as the government supplied very little dog food that was mostly used when on patrol, and you had to cook up a warm meal for them before you had your supper. We were catching northern pike, some char, and the cones and lauche (Mackenzie Delta white fish) that were netted for dog food at Fort McPherson.

One of the doctors came over to Fort McPherson from the hospital in Inuvik and wanted to go for a dog team ride. I told him that I would take them for a quick run and have them drop their stinking juicy stool. He said he had a really strong stomach and had attended a lot of autopsies, and strong smells did not bother him. At Fort McPherson, we fed them a lot of what we called “pit fish,” which was simply netting them and then putting them in a big pit, and they partly rotted, and the bones deteriorated a little, and you fed the chopped-up portions of the fish. The dog droppings are highly offensive to begin with, and when they are fed the pit fish, the smell is totally offensive. He wanted to experience a dog team ride as we had two teams, and he saw a number of patients at the nursing station and then was ready for his first dog team ride. I told him that I would take them for a short run, and they could dump their bowels and get rid of some of the smell. He insisted that I not bother taking them for a run as they had told him at Inuvik that the dogs go as fast as they can run when they first hit the trail, and he wanted to experience that. 

Getting out of the settlement was as much of a scary ride as he suggested, and when we hit the straight area going across the river, they slowed somewhat. He was sitting atthe bottom of the toboggan with canvas sides running from the front to the back. I was standing up on the back, enjoying the fresh air, and they began to drop their stool in a very forceful spray. The next thing I know, he was hanging off to the side, and I will assure you that he had a real strong stomach as he was heaving it as far as I had ever seen a person chuck it. Finally, he called for a halt to get a rest, regain some of his composure, and breathe some fresh air.

I have been to Haines, Alaska, seven times to fish for the five different varieties of salmon, four times when I was stationed in the Yukon. After I retired, I had a friend who retired after selling his trucking business and bought a big motor home. He and his wife went down to Drumheller, and she refused to go anywhere else in the new motor home. I told him about the good fishing in Haines, Alaska, and he invited four of his friends to accompany us. Everyone took turns driving while the rest played cards, and one slept. Three days later, we were in Haines buying a three-day fishing license for $11.00 U.S. You can possess six salmon stream-side and could continue fishing if you either canned them or froze them. We would catch them, clean them without the heads and tails, put them in plastic ziplock bags, and then drive back into Haines to put them in the Styrofoam chests and the hardware store freezer before going back out fishing. We rented motel rooms and ate at the local restaurant. By the beginning of the third day of constantly fighting salmon in the fast-flowing Dyee River, most of the fishermen could hardly raise their arms. We did catch and release on the other varieties of salmon, and periodically, you would get a King Salmon hooked. We were upstream from a bridge that had a center support pier, and you had difficulty directing it on the shoreside of the pier, often having to cut the line to save it because you could not turn a 59 to 80-pound King Salmon when it headed back out to sea. There was no limit on King Salmon in that river because they were trying to discourage them from spawning in that river since they ruined five or six other salmons' nests when they dug up the gravel to lay their eggs. Norm and I made three separate trips that year with his and my friends, and the most we brought back was 285 Sockeye Salmon, which were still frozen when we got back to Sherwood Park. We shared the cost of the fuel withthe guests, so it made for a pretty affordable fishing trip.

While at Carcross, I fished off Skagway in the Gulf of Alaska and caught a number of halibut weighing in excess of two hundred pounds. I believe that the record is just over 500 pounds. I went with a chap that I befriended who lived in Skagway with his wife, and he had a big fishing boat. His job was to go either up or down the White Pass and Yukon Route Railway in an eight-cylinder Speeder to inspect the telegraph lines that were part of the NORAD backup defense system coming out of Alaska. To save him a lot of mileage, he would bunk in one of the spare bedrooms in the vertical log building that we rented for a detachment, and then he could go back down to Skagway the next day.



I made the rounds to the stores and restaurants and got any of their out-of-date chickens or saved the spoiled chickens. I would hang a five-gallon bucket with a very tight lid with my chickens stuffed with rocks so they would sink quickly to the bottom. I would hang the bucket in a tree in the sun for a few days to really ripen them up. We would anchor the boat and fork a few of them overboard, hook a bit of the ripe chicken on the hooks, and lower them down to where the really smelly ones were on the bottom. Sometimes, we would have two of them on the lines at one time, and I would be hanging onto two rods while he worked on getting the anchor up and out of the way of the lines. The tug of war began to get them to the surface. He would shoot them with a .22 rifle because if you got one of them in the boat alive, they would more than likely beat the bottom out of the boat with their big bodies and tails flapping. I keep bragging that I am the only “Queen’s Cowboy” who has ever lassoed a giant squid that was 29 feet long and weighed 285 pounds.