When I was posted to St. John's, I was put in the Criminal Investigation Branch, and it was not too long before I realized that I was the chauffeur for the chief investigator because he had lost his license for impaired driving. It got me to all the major crimes and murder investigations, and I was taking statements from witnesses and doing photographs of scenes and bodies because the Ident Branch only had one man for all of the Island. I guess they were happy with my work because I did that for about nine months. The Corporal was really pleased as it sure brightened up his files with scale drawings and photographs, and I made all the accommodation arrangements forwe were there for a couple of days. Sometimes, we had the suspect in custody, and it made sense with two policemen in the car on those occasions.

When we did not have a case going, I was detailed onto Highway Patrol and as the "Musketry Instructor." That meant I packed up the old "pop and dodger range" into a 16-passenger van and went from Detachment to Detachment and did the annual shoot so that the members did not have to leave their detachment area. Vic Lundrigan had been in Regina for his indoctrination training when I received the award for the highest score for a recruit for rifle and revolver. When I was posted to Newfoundland, he was in charge of highway patrol units for the island. They had some sort of deal with the Newfoundland government that no detachment would be short of manpower. I ran the Musketry Instruction for the three years I was in Newfoundland, and then when I went to the Yukon, they had me doing the same thing.

Being on CIB, we had four guys jump from a Russian fishing ship who wanted to join life in Canada. They had a man in the hospital who had an appendix operation, and the guard, the patient, the ship's doctor, and their communist communications officer came to the office and turned themselves in, declaring political asylum. We would just provide them transportation over to Halifax, and they would be processed with the Immigration Department from there. That was when things got complicated with a pea soup fog that prevented air travel. The hotels were full, and it was decided that we would have to put some bunks in the storeroom in the office and notify Immigration to send money to provide meals. The money was transferred to the bank in St. John's, and they also sent money for the hotel accommodation.

The ship they had come on had left the Grand Banks because of the heavy fog, so security became pretty lax. They spoke absolutely no English, and I was the fifth bunk in the storeroom. On the fourth day of confinement, I took them shopping atthe local Safeway store and turned the Immigration money for food and lodging over to them. They had never in all their life had so much money in their possession. They could not believe having a store so well stocked and everything that had a picture label on it, so they bought one of each. They bought one of every fruit that was available, and each one of them had a shopping cart heaped with food when we came back, so meals for them were forgotten as they kept sampling all of the goodies they had bought. They were most surprised by how much flavor our food had; even the tinned pork and beans were a marvel to them.

I could not believe that the doctor had never seen an orange, lemon, banana, grapes, pineapple, and half a dozen other fruits and vegetables they bought, so I had to show them all how to eat them and how to peel them. I even took them out to see their first hockey game. They could not believe that a man could travel so fast on ice on a set of blades. I was taken up with them for almost two weeks before the fog lifted, and they headed for Halifax. We filled pad after pad of pictures that I drew with the accompanying word in English, and they wrote in Russian. I made copies for them all, and it was a chorus in the room of them saying the English words back and forth, and they were starting to put sentences together before they left for Halifax. It was the most difficult thing for them all, trying not to say the word with a guttural pronunciation or sound.

With all the traveling around Newfoundland as a chauffeur (I was getting sick of the drunken Corporal who did not let up on his drinking at night), I volunteered to go relieving. The Force had an agreement with the government that they would be fully staffed at every Detachment, so when someone was off duty sick or went on leave, a member was sent to replace them until they returned. So I would be the second or third man, and sometimes I was the only man. I did that for about nine months until I had to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night. Every Detachment hada different layout. There were absolutely no lights in town at night, and it was overcast and total absolute darkness. I stumbled around trying to find the bathroom or the front door until I stumbled over the garbage can and then, shortly after, went back to bed.

The only places that I was not stationed or attended during a major investigation in all of the Island and most of the Labrador werePort au Basque, Cornerbrook, and Gander. I got to see Gander through a lot of smoke as I was on highway patrol at the time, and they had huge fires in that area. We were doing traffic control and then escorting a line of traffic through the fire area for a couple of weeks in and around Gander. We stayed in a motel and ate our meals in the local restaurant in the town of Gander. We blocked the road at night and did the escorting during the day. A lot of the traffic was trucks that were supplying food to the stores in St. John’s and the bigger centers around the Avalon Peninsula.

When I was relieving the Corporal at Nain, it was 30, and about 40 miles out, it was open water. The Newfoundland idea of winter gear was the second pair of pants and a canvas duct parka, galoshes over your ankle boots, and leather mitts with a wool liner. Even with a full set of long-johns underwear, I was still freezing my ass because of the high humidity; the cold penetrated everything you could wear. When it was time to have the Corporal return off leave, they brought him there with the single Otter and picked me up to go up to Frobisher Bay (now Iqaluit) to do a violent mental patient escort out to Montreal as they could not sedate him anymore in fear of killing him with the medication, and he was still too violent to be able to put him on a commercial flight.

I had been freezing my ass off at Nain for four weeks as you had to feed the dog team and patrol around the settlement as there was no crime to speak of. When we arrived in Frobisher Bay, I was met with members in beautiful long "down-filled" parkas, wind pants, mukluks, and gauntlets. The only thing that we had in common that was warm was the muskrat fur hat on our heads, and they were getting $6.00 a month more for "Isolation Northern Pay." We went to Montreal and then back to St. John's, and the first thing I did was put in a memo requesting a transfer to "G" division.

About three weeks later, I was in the C.O.'s office, and he wanted to know why I wanted to leave Newfoundland. I told him why. He told me to go out and keep the secretary company, and he would make a few phone calls to see what he could do for me. About ten minutes later, I was called back into his office, and he said the only place he could find open for a single man accommodation was Dawson City. I asked him where in hell Dawson City was. “In "G" Division,” he said. “It is in the Yukon, and he would put me in the radio room so I would not get any more court cases. When you get your court cases cleared up, you willbe able to drive there.”

In the middle of July, I headed out with my Rambler (which was fully Pullmanized) station wagon, pulling my trailer, boat, motor, and all my gear. Just sixteen full days later and 6,996 miles later, I arrived in Dawson City on the 16th of August 1964.