Newfoundland officially joined Canada at midnight on March 31, 1949, and officially became Canada’s tenth province. Both England and the people in Newfoundland had been working on it for a number of years, and Joey Smallwood finally managed to get it approved and became the first Premier of the province.

Bringing up his name brings to mind an incident and my first meeting with him. I was doing a radar operation outside of St. John’s at night, and this black Cadillac coupe went through the radar far in excess of the speed limit. I chased it down, and the driver identified himself and stated that he was a pig farmer. I reduced the fine, and I did not hear anything about the ticket as the fine was paid. Evidently, there was some discussion in the legislature about the fairness of the RCMP, and Joey Smallwood got up in the house waving his ticket and said they are fair with everyone and no one is getting away with breaking the law. Of course, it got a lot of press, and shortly after, I was invited to a visit with the Commanding Officer at his office to explain why I ticketed the Premier of the province. I had the printout of the speed and said that I had been in the province for almost a month and asked him if he knew the name of the Premier of Saskatchewan. If he was doing radar at ten o’clock at night and a violator came through the radar, would he be able to tell me if it was the Premier if he had been in Saskatchewan for just two weeks? I went with him to the legislature, and he apologized to Joey Smallwood. Smallwood said it was not necessary as the point was made that the laws applied to everyone, and he thanked me for reducing the ticket on the old pig farmer as it showed the fairness of how the law was applied and helped make his point in the legislature. On the way out to the car, the C.O. said to keep up the fairness in your police work, and I only got a bad time from the members for ticketing the Premier of the province.

Up to that point, the people had been policed by the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary in St. John’s, and the Newfoundland Rangers policed the rest of the island and Labrador. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police took over policing Newfoundland and Labrador, and those who wished to “badge over” were welcomed. The City of St. John’s wished to be policed by their current Royal Newfoundland Constabulary as their members were afraid of the transfer policy of the RCMP and had homes established and families well settled. The Newfoundland Rangers had policed the communities around the isolated outports along the coast and settlements on the Labrador coast and welcomed an increase in pay and benefits and a good pension scheme. Most of them were hired because they filled the doorway of the recruiting officer, and education was not considered. Only on-the-job training was the extent of their knowledge of the enforcement of the laws of the land.

When I arrived from training in Regina, Saskatchewan, I was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Branch. I thought that was a pretty good posting for a new recruit, as they handled most of the major investigations. The other member,whoaccompanied me on the long drive from Regina, got posted to Harbour Breton on the south coast of the Avalon Peninsula. It turned initially to be a great assignment, but I was soon to learn that I was to be the chauffeur for the Corporal who had lost his driver’s license for impaired driving. There was only one CIB section on the entire island, and they handled all the major crimes all over the island.And I was to drive him to wherever there was a suspicious death or major crime.

There was only pavement in St. John’s and Corner Brook, and the rest of the roads were gravel. They were beginning to build the Trans-Canada Highway across the island. It meant loading up a number of spare tires on rims, getting into coveralls, and heading out to the different points anywhere there was a major crime to be investigated, and I would be changing the tires when necessary there and back. The tires at the time were two-ply with a four-ply rating, and with the miles of gravel roads maintained by graders, the wear slivers of metal from the blades seemed to always end up in the tires of the vehicle I was driving. I began taking pictures of the crime scenes, and having worked for two and a half years doing survey work in Ontario, doing up plans of the lots we surveyed, I did the scale drawings and was allowed to take witness statements. It meant that I got a lot of good court time introducing the photographs and plan drawings for the court proceedings, which added a great deal to his investigative reports. It meant that we got to every settlement throughout the island except Corner Brook and Port aux Basques in the next three years that I was stationed in Newfoundland and Labrador.

When not away on a major investigation, I was assigned to highway patrol and also became the “Musketry Instructor” for the “B” Division. I had a sixteen-passenger van available to me. I loaded up the “pop and dogger” range and went from detachment to detachment, conducting the annual shoot. The ex-members of the Newfoundland Constabulary and Rangers did not have any firearms training and had never fired a revolver, and some had never fired a rifle, as they only had a “nightstick.” So, giving them revolver and rifle training and an introduction to tear gas was a difficult task that became one of my jobs. The training also included cleaning and oiling the revolver and maintaining the rifles. Trying to teach a novice shooter how to hit a target was a difficult job when they had no intention of ever using the revolver or rifle in their service. They showed more interest in the new batons that extended, as they had only been familiar with the nightstick.

The Newfoundland government had an agreement with the Force that the posts would be manned at all times. Before Confederation, the local policeman’s idea of taking holidays was going fishing out in the bay or hunting back of the hill from the settlement for ptarmigan or moose or caribou and was basically available in or near the community. Most of the current RCMP members were from the Maritimes or other parts of Canada, and they left the island for their annual leave. I was repeatedly assigned to different points while they were away, so I got to be the second man and sometimes the only man looking after the settlement for the duration of their absence and living in pretty basic accommodation, mostly in the spare room in the office, on a metal bunk and eating out locally for my meals. So, I got to live in an endless number of communities throughout the island and up the Labrador coast.

In the first week in St. John’s, I was on night patrol with an older former Newfoundland Ranger, and he was driving about 25 mph. The traffic was backed up behind the marked police car. I questioned him on why he was driving so slowly, and his response was that last night he had 25 cars behind him as they were afraid of passing a police car. About that time, a call came on the radio that there was a really big fight at the Topsail Inn, and all cars were to respond. He did not answer the radio call and report our location. I saw a sign on the side of the road that we were leaving Topsail and took the radio, indicating that we were just east of Topsail. He pulled off, turned around, and drove back to the Topsail Inn and did not get out of the car. I asked him if he was coming. He said, “You took the call; you can look after it.” He sat in the car, and I heard three other cars responding on the radio and were on their way to Topsail.

When I went through the door, it was bedlam. There were at least four different men fighting in different areas of the room, and there was a group of people up on the stage area with the tables overturned and throwing bottles and ashtrays at another group with an overturned table about the middle of the hall. I went toward two big chaps who were duking it out near the door and tapped the biggest on the shoulder, saying the fight was over; the police were here. He turned around, grabbed the front of my uniform and the cross strap that held up my duty belt and holster, and swung me off my feet. This was a fisherman who, for most of his life, had been pulling cold, wet netting off a fish trap, and his upper body strength was phenomenal. He, with the second hand, was swinging me around until the front of my uniform and cross strap broke away, and I crashed into a number of overturned tables and chairs. He came over and kicked me in the hip.

When I got up, one side of my uniform and leather cross strap were still in his hand. We exchanged a few body blows, and he held his arms high, making it hard for me to get a blow to the side of his head. He would periodically swing the leather cross strap and hit me with it, which upset me a little more. I went into a rapid number of body blows and forcefully raised my knee into his groin. He went down backward, and I rolled him over and managed to get his arms behind his back and put on the handcuffs. When I got up, I offered a few of his buddies a boxing match and got no takers. Most of the beer bottles and ashtrays had been flung back and forth by this time, and the other members started arriving. I took my prisoner out of the hall and put him in the back seat of the police car. I found out from my ex-ranger that this guy was the big bully in the area, and he was really surprised that I was able to arrest him. I said to him that in training we learned that we could never afford to lose a fight, and I thanked him for his great support and assistance.

During the time I was stationed in St. John’s, we moved from the old barracks to the U.S. military base that they had closed. We moved from Kenna's Hill to Fort Pepperrell and from 18 members in the barracks to two-man rooms. The Identification Branch was at the other end of our building on the lower floor, and the mess was right below our rooms with two good cooks. I began helping the Sgt. with the identification services and was able to have access to the darkroom for processing my black-and-white pictures. All I had to do was buy the photographic paper. He was alone, and the member who was in Ottawa developed every malady to avoid the transfer to Newfoundland. I managed to identify a fingerprint at a major break-and-enter at a warehouse, which led to his arrest and big jail time for one of the local criminals. I was periodically sent to the local crime scenes to take pictures and scale drawings if the Sgt. was off on another point.

I started with another member, sleeping in different warehouses. One night, the culprits backed through the big doors, and five of them were loading perishables in the back. I sneaked out after I had phoned the office for backup. I closed the back of the box and announced that the police were here and the fun was over, and then locked myself in the truck and turned the key off when I saw the flashing lights coming. The dog master was one of the first cars, and his dog got to chew on one of them just as he ran out of the warehouse. Two were still in the back of the truck when I closed the doors on them, and two were found hiding in the bathroom in the warehouse. So we cleaned up the “Muddy Pond Thieves” in one night.

Most of the ex-Rangers were known for their size but not much brainpower. I was sent by one who was in charge of the filing room to retrieve his watch at his residence. His wife served him soup for lunch, and he usually took his false teeth out and put them in a glass of water. I went to his home and asked his wife for his watch, and she said she had no idea where he put his watch and invited me in to help her look for it. I immediately saw that he had put his watch in the glass of water instead of his false teeth.

I handled the tear gas training, and they sent me one shell of a new variety of gas. Instead of aggravating your eyes, nose, and sweat glands, this was supposed to affect your nervous system associated with control of your bladder and muscles of the anus. We had a riot at the Queen’s Penitentiary, and I was called in to help as the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary had no tear gas. The prisoners were burning furniture in the courtyard. On a loud hailer, I advised them that they had five minutes to return to their cells, and it only brought jeers and them throwing burning pieces of furniture up to where we were standing on the top of the wall by one of the guard houses. After the five minutes were up, I fired the powder over their heads, and it settled amongst them. In about five minutes, the front of most of them had a darkened area at their crotch, and then there was a mass exodus with them fighting to get into the doorway that led to their cells and a bathroom. There never was another riot at the penitentiary in the three years that I remained in Newfoundland.

My partner in my room was a recruit right out of training, and I was able to introduce him to the Nurses' Residence in St. John’s as I had been going with a nurse who caught TB and was in the sanatorium. He accompanied me on most of my diving expeditions. I was doing a lot of trap and skeet shooting at the time, and he tried that a few times. We went hunting ptarmigan together. He and I were sleeping at different warehouses to see if we could catch some criminals, and we worked together on highway patrol. I was away doing the Annual Shoot and came home to sleep, and he went on patrol with another member as they had a prison break, and they caught them trying to break into a rural hardware store. He went to the police car to call for help, and while he was away, they jumped the other member and kicked him into unconsciousness. When he returned, the ringleader shot and killed him.

I accompanied his body to Ottawa, gave the eulogy at his funeral, and stayed with his parents. What I did not know was that he was writing his mother and telling her of all the good times we had together. His dad was a Baptist minister, and he was their only child. They sort of took me on as their son, and she wrote me letters, and they came to Newfoundland and visited. He had retired, and they bought a truck and camper and began touring down to Florida in the winter and places they missed in Canada.