When we finished our dive, we went into the man-made harbor of the Yacht Club facilities, and they were lowering a huge outboard motor onto a boat with a winch truck. We watched them lower it onto the back of the boat, fix up the controls, plug in the fuel line, and start up the engine. They unhooked the lines that tied the boat to the dock and began to back it away. As soon as the front of the boat was clear of the dock, it accelerated backward to the middle of the harbor, and the motor tilted up and then went off the boat and into the water, breaking all the lines and cables that held it, and disappeared into the ocean. The man paddled the boat back to the dock, and we introduced ourselves as we were still in our wet suits. He was the President of the Royal Newfoundland Yacht Club, and he said that the boat was their brand-new rescue boat, and they had not arranged insurance on it yet.

Jim suggested that we could go down and hook the line from the tow truck on it and recover it right away without any cost. We went to Jim’s Volkswagen van, got our tanks and gear on, and got into the boat. The tow truck driver directed us to where he thought it went down. When we stopped, it was the end of the cable on the tow truck. When we went down, there was ahuge motor lying on the sandy bottom. We borrowed an old piece of canvas, rolled the motor onto the canvas, and got a rope attached to the skeg of the motor and up to the boat so that it would slide along on the cowling of the motor, and the winch pulled it over to the dock.

We attached the slings that they had used to lift the motor originally to the lift points on the motor, and the winch lifted it out of the water and lowered it back down onto the boat. This time, the owner was tightening the big levered security bolts onto the transom of the boat.

We were invited into the posh field house and hall to change out of our wet suits and have a round from the bar. They suggested that maybe we could recover some of the members' anchors as every boat in the club was on a picnic moored over by Bell Island, and when they went to leave, eleven boats lost their anchors in the rocky bottom as they got stuck and could not be lifted. We arranged to come out the next day, and they could take us over to the site, and we would raise their anchors for them as we had to recharge our tanks.

Early the next day, we were ferried over to Bell Island with several of the owners of the anchors. We dove in only forty feet of water and found a huge field of broken rocks and recovered ten of the anchors. One was in a deep crevice in the rocks, and we could not reach it to bring it up. The owner of the big outboard motor said they had the motor running as the cowling had prevented water long enough for the carburetor to drain, and no water entered the engine. They had to order in the ends and one of the cables, and no other damage to the nine-thousand-dollar motor.



Tying Up with Memorial University

The head of the Memorial University Marine Biology Section was Fred Aldridge, and he phoned us the next day and asked if we would be interested in collecting some specimens for the Memorial University as he had a budget and would pay us for good specimens. He said he had several tanks they have for the public to view while visiting the University. He had a list of five specimens that were rare at most university tanks. We said we would have no trouble getting him prime specimens on their own little rocks. Jim had been working on getting his degree in Marine Biology and could identify all of the invertebrates as he knew the names all that were associated with a shale formation, and it seemed that each one had its own piece of rock. He knew the names of everything that we encountered and was trying to familiarize me with all the different things we encountered on every dive. 

On a Saturday morning, we got the list of five from Fred and went out to Logy Bay, and in three hours, we were back with the five specimens, and of them we had four or five of them with different sizes. He gave us another list, and we did not even get out of our gear before returning with all on that list in duplicates and triplicates. He had a list of three more. We were putting on our gear and about to enter the water when he came out from behind a rock and said, "I have found a place for the new marine biology section, and it is your gold mine of specimens that has led me to the location."



The coastline in that area is possibly almost a vertical 600-foot face, and a big chunk of the face had separated from the shoreface that is over half a mile long and had gone out about 500 feet from the shore and has a hundred feet of water between a slipped rock and the coastal cliff. It is only about five miles out of the city of St. John’s and has good access down to the ocean via a small river valley trail that we could drive within 500 feet of the ocean.

He explained that they would be able to pump water into the viewing tanks from the depth where the specimens lived and not have to make up the salt water and chill it and save a lot of work, effort, and expense back at the University. Today, true to his word, that is where the entire Marine Biology Section is located. I understand there is a plaque honoring Jim and me for finding the location for them. It was only five or six miles out of the city of St. John’s, and it had the biggest lobsters in the area because it was too deep for the lobster fishery boats as there was over a hundred feet of water in the middle and the lobster in that area had never ever been fished and they had all the natural food they needed.

Jim and I had chalkboards to communicate back and forth underwater, and I would see a specimen and draw a picture, and he would be able to tell me what the name of it was when we finished the dive and point it out in the books that he possessed.We were diving in that area one day, and the bottom was right at 60 feet. I noticed what I thought was a hot water tank. I noticed off to my right, made a small picture, and put the name of the hot water tank and “no rust” on my chalkboard.We surfaced a short while later and he asked what did I see.Jim was a Sgt. in the Army Intelligence section, and when I showed him my picture, he said.This is salt water, and a hot water tank without rust is not very likely;show me where you saw it.We returned to our path, and when he saw it, he wrote “DEPTH CHARGE” in big letters and then wrote, “MAYBE THERE IS MORE.”We found the second one and left the area.He looked after notifying the Navy and Air Force, and two days later, we were showing a crew of Navy SKUBA divers out of Halifax of the location of the depth charges.

They stood them on their ends and unscrewed the depth detonation end and then took the long strands of cordite out and we brought the empty tanks back to the beach for them.Jim had built a lift bag that was a waterproof canvas with a round area of about two feet of neck strands of parachute cord and a hook.We just hooked onto the contact clips on the side of the depth charges, hooked the second one onto the maze of cords, took our mouthpiece out, and put enough air into the lift bag neck until they were buoyant, and as we went up the air continued to expand and come out of the open bottom.All we had to do was tow them to shore on the surface.Two of the Navy divers each carried the live portion up to the surface and then to their vehicle, and they rolled the empty depth charge casing to the sides of their vehicle.That vehicle departed to go to the Airbase at Torbay and returned for the divers.They had not seen one of the lift bags in operation, and we gave them one so they could copy it and make some of them for themselves.

Evidently, during the war, a Canso bomber took off from Torbay Airport on a reconnaissance submarine patrol, and they spotted a German submarine taking on fresh water at our favorite diving site.They circled around, and in the meantime, the submarine was getting underway, and they lined up on its departure path and dropped the depth charges. One of them hit the hull of the submarine and bounced off, and neither of the depth charges went off as they were set to go off in 80 feet of water, and there was only 60 feet of water where we located them.One of them was dented on the end so the story was very truthful.