In 1967, the Yukon Government Tourist Department decided, as part of celebrating 100 years of Canada, to organize an adventure-filled trip from Whitehorse to Dawson City on the Yukon River. They advertised in every city and every yacht club across Canada and the United States. They set a date and wrote it up, and people began to turn up with everything from inflatable kayaks to single-person canoes, some reasonable two-person and three-person canoes, sensible home-built river boats, and even a three-screw Chris Craft pleasure cruiser that accommodated six people.

I was one of four members chosen to be responsible for the safety and well-being of the participants, as I had already completed three trips down the Yukon River from Whitehorse to Dawson City. I had volunteered on the paddle-wheeler steamboat "Keno" on a trip to Dawson City, where we needed extra hands on board to help lower the smoke stack to go under the road bridge at Carmacks. We suited up in protective asbestos clothing to help lower the smoke stack and then raise it up quickly because we needed to navigate the Five Fingers Rapids shortly after the bridge and another big rapid down from that point.

When I was in the Yukon, I was the “Musketry Instructor” and ran the annual shoots and taught the use of the tear gas gun. We had trouble with the “hippies” using the six paddle wheelers on the dry dock down by the river in Whitehorse. They used the staterooms for accommodation, and it would take hours to check all the rooms on the five boats, as some of them had two or three levels of staterooms running along both sides of the boat and send them packing. They would hide after being forced to leave and come back to another boat. They were never going to be placed back in service, so I discharged several tear gas shells in each boat that were just the powder variety into the heating system ventilation of the riverboats, and they were not using the boats for accommodation for months. Some of them decided to camp on the decks of one of the boats and lit a fire in a portion of a forty-five-gallon drum. The deck of the boat caught fire, and three of them were totally destroyed before the fire department could put out the fires.

This prompted the sale of the "Keno" to the Klondike Tourist Association, and it was sailed down to Dawson City. It was decided to move the "Whitehorse" to the other end of town for a more convenient tourist attraction. They built a skid system for underneath the huge boat and hooked it onto two big D-8 Caterpillars. They managed to haul it until they encountered the pavement of the city streets and could not pull it any further. I was working traffic control that day for the move, and the power lines had to be cut to allow the mass of the boat to navigate the route, leaving most of the downtown portion of the city without power. There was much discussion on what could be used to make the skids more slippery. They jacked up one side at a time and greased the bottom of the skids, but that lasted about two lengths of the boat before the Caterpillars started skidding and marking up the pavement. I suggested using some “Ivory” soap flakes, and they bought out every box in town. They jacked up the skids again and sprinkled the flakes underneath. One Caterpillar started moving the boat, and people spread soap flakes in front of the skids, allowing the boat to go the remainder of the route without any difficulty to where it is still on display by the bridge that crosses the river to the residential area of Riverdale.

My other trip was with the head of the Forestry Department in Dawson City. He had a lifelong dream to travel the entire length of the Yukon River from near Whitehorse to where it empties into the Beaufort Sea. He asked me to accompany him in his boat, which he had built for the trip. Due to the extended distances between points where fuel for the outboard motor could be purchased, I built a fuel tank out of thin metal with baffles and cross baffles that extended almost the entire bottom of the riverboat and held hundreds of gallons of fuel.

He decided to launch it at Whitehorse due to the difficulty of navigating the short stretch from Nares Lake and through Miles Canyon and then having to take the boat out of the water to get around the hydroelectric dam just upstream from Whitehorse. The total distance of the river from the source, a glacier near Atlin, British Columbia, to where it flows into the Bering Sea is 1,982 miles. We planned on using the outboard motor to shorten the time involved in making the journey. When we had to sleep, we pulled up the motor and drifted along with the current. We took turns navigating and sleeping in the 24-hour daylight.

In central Alaska, we encountered many miles of meandering river, but still with about a six or seven knot current going with us, allowing us to cut all the corners as close to the bank as we dared. He sold the boat and motor to the Inuit community at the mouth, and we flew to Fairbanks, then to Whitehorse, and drove back to Dawson City with my vehicle, having used up all my annual leave for that trip in the fall of 1964.

Getting back to the “Yukon Flotilla,” we organized a meeting with more than fifty boat owners and their passengers and had maps of the different portions of the river that we figured were dangerous spots. I explained the danger of the strong winds that would result during the crossing of Lake La Barge and suggested that everyone stay close to the western shore because of the “catabatic” winds that would come down the mountainsides as the sun moved further north, cooling the mountainsides and causing the air to sink into the valley all along the 30 or so miles of the narrow lake. I suggested that if they wished, they could get the book that the riverboat captains had written, which had all the maps and danger spots outlined and directions on how to navigate the river and read the water when traveling with the current, including where a lot of the shallow water sandbars were located. I displayed the copy that I had purchased.

Every boat was given a number, and we had records of everyone’s name, address, and contact point of next of kin in the event of a tragedy or death en route. If you had fishing gear to augment your food supplies, there were salmon, lake trout, Arctic grayling, and northern pike to be fished for in the river. Departure time was set for noon, and the four members of the RCMP were charged with the responsibility of getting them safely to Dawson City. The traveling distance from Whitehorse to the margin of Lake La Barge is 82 miles, our first camping spot. The other campsites were chosen to accommodate at least 50 fires, and they were all to be extinguished properly at every site.

They were reminded that they needed provisions for at least fifteen days on the river, as the only re-supply spot would be at Carmacks. With much horn-blowing from people at the site, the more than fifty boats of all manner of watercraft set out from Whitehorse atthe beginning of our Yukon River trip. It was arranged that with the two freighter canoes, one would lead the group, and when they reached the next chosen campsite, they would check them in as they arrived, while the second canoe would follow the pack and offer assistance to anyone in distress. When we arrived at the campsite at the margin of Lake La Barge, the question arose whether we had seen boats number 12 and 13, as they had not arrived, and people were wondering if we had encountered them en route.

We assembled a group and questioned if anyone had seen them. Three different people said they had seen them in the middle of the lake and felt they were on the east side, contrary to what they had been cautioned. As I had described, the winds had picked up, and the last quarter of the lake had fairly high waves, with the winds coming from the mountains onto the east side of the lake.

I got my spotting scope out, and sure enough, the two canoes were in the lee of some rocky islands, paddling furiously against high waves and a strong wind about ten miles away. We took all our camping gear out of the freighter canoe, and I headed out into the rough water on one side of the canoe, struggling against the waves and wind from the east. I had to cut across the waves to go directly south, taking on a lot of water from the spray.

When I reached them, they were continuously paddling to stay in the lee of the rocky islands. I had them come alongside, allowing them to rest while the outboard motor kept us in relatively calm water. I could only take their supplies to lighten their canoe and their 13- and 14-year-old children with the promise that I would return for the parents, who were left with the promise that I would land their supplies at the campsite and tow one of the canoes. I asked why they had tried to travel on the east side of the lake despite my caution. She said everyone else was going along the west side, and they wanted some privacy on the big lake. I had the kids get inside one of their tents to stay dry while I wore a raincoat with a hood and pants to keep myself dry. Returning was easier as I was partly going with the waves, though I still took on some spray with the wind gusting at 40 to 50 mph. I got back safely to the parents, landed them at the campsite, and found that others had set up their tents and had a campfire going. I enjoyed a very late supper.

With the 24-hour daylight, we had people ready for the next day’s paddle at 4:00 a.m. They were upset that they couldn’t travel ahead of the escort boat because we needed to identify the next campsite at Hootalinqua. We didn’t want the members scattered along the seemingly endless miles of the Yukon River. The Yukon Tourist Department had issued camping permits only for points with adequate areas to accommodate the number of campers and had arranged for dry, pre-cut firewood at the campsites. The last job of the members at the back of the convoy was to go around with a five-gallon bucket and douse the campfires with enough water to ensure that the fire was completely out and the stones were cooled off. Sometimes, it took ten buckets of water hauled from the river to ensure the fires were completely out and the gravel was cooled. This task allowed the last to leave to enjoy some solitude during the Yukon River trip.

Our next campsite was at Big Salmon River, and everything went well. The paddlers were spread out and enjoyed their piece of the river in true solitude. We had some difficulty with the big Chris Craft as it dragged its anchors on the gravel bottom and in the ten-knot current. We tied a long rope to a tree up the shore and put the freighter canoe along the shore. The Chris Craft could come ashore to have supper with the group and fire and then go back aboard to sleep and return for breakfast on the shore. There was one incident where the boat encountered a sharp sandbar but was able to back off and find deeper water.

Our next campsite was at the mouth of the Little Salmon River. The Chris Craft was able to tie to the shore in the river, where the boat came against a vertical bank and in deep water, so they again joined the group for supper and breakfast. With five people on board, including four guests from a band, we had live entertainment each evening.

We all got underway in good time, but about three-quarters of the way to Carmacks, Chris Craft ran onto a sandbar and became stuck. I tried pulling it back upriver, but it didn’t budge. We were about 20 to 30 miles from Carmacks. I decided to go there and borrow some of the Forestry’s big high-pressure water pumps to wash the gravel from underneath the hull. Unfortunately, the owner had tried to free the boat while I was gone and had damaged all three props. Our second freighter canoe and members came back with their boat and two guys from Forestry. We tied onto the big boat, both forward and aft, and used the pump to blast the sand and gravel from underneath the hull. We cleared the entire length of the sandbar in less than an hour. We stayed tied to the big boat and towed it to Carmacks, where we maneuvered it to the boat launch area. The owner phoned to have someone drive his truck and trailer to Carmacks, and we took his number off the list.

During the evening, we held a group meeting and explained how we would control their movements through the Five Finger Rapids. The name comes from the four rocky islands that split the river into five channels. In the 1900s, explosives were used to widen the channel on one side, and the safest channel was the northwest one. This is followed by a big rapids named "Rink Rapids," after the captain who sank his paddle wheeler trying to navigate the Five Finger Rapids. This is considered the most dangerous portion of the Yukon River trip. I talked to the owner of the general store in Carmacks, who said he sold every article of camp food and set a record for one-day sales. He had been warned about the number of anticipated customers by the Tourist Department and had stocked up.

In the morning, we set up with my boat at the top and a rescue boat below if needed. I waved each canoe to begin the passage, and we managed to get everyone through the Five Finger and Rink Rapids without incident.

Our next campsite was Fort Selkirk, an abandoned settlement from the early 1960s. It had some of the residence buildings, school, church, weather station buildings to explore, and a large campsite. The distance from Carmacks to Dawson City was 260 miles. We next camped at Stewart River and met the Burien family, who mined and made a living trapping. The following day, we completed the last leg of the journey, arriving in Dawson City with everyone safe and tired. The last campsite was named Louse Town, where the Klondike River flows into the Yukon River on the south side. We had our final campfire there with the supplied wood.

Arrangements were made to have two buses and five or six semi-trailers to haul the boats back to Whitehorse. The participants had two days to tour Dawson City and enjoy the tourist attractions. Having spent two different postings to Dawson City, I knew most of the residents by their first names.