Arriving at the new posting of Dawson City, completely unfamiliar with its history and needing to learn a new set of ordinances and how the laws of the land were to be applied, within twenty minutes of ending my long journey from St. John's, Newfoundland, some 6,996 miles and sixteen long days of travel, I was involved in assisting with the investigation of a serious hit-and-run accident. The young cyclist was in the hospital, and the drunken driver was in custody.

Learning the Detachment area required endless trips in every direction by car, plane, and helicopter. The distances were not just a few minutes away but several hours, with little to no habitation present almost everywhere. Dealing with hundreds of miles to the north and east and 100 miles to the border with Alaska, the spectacular height of the mountains was awe-inspiring. I had been in the Rocky Mountains in the Banff and Jasper area and thought they were truly special and spectacular mountains until I got to the Yukon.

Everywhere in the world, the tree line stops at about the 6,000-foot level above sea level (ASL). However, when considering that the valley floor was around 4,000 feet in both Banff and Jasper areas, that meant only about 2,000 feet of trees and then only about 1,500 to 2,000 feet of rock above the tree line. When I got to the Yukon, the valley floor was just 600 feet ASL, the tree line was around 6,000 ASL, and there were anywhere from 2,000 feet to Mount Logan, with an elevation of 5,959 meters (19,591 feet) of rock. There were five mountains on the side of Mount Logan that were spectacular.

I was determined to go out to Banff and take the Mountain Rescue course, and I was the coordinator for the Yukon for the four years I was there. I had three helicopter trips to Mount Logan to look for overdue mountain climbers. The mountain is only about 75 miles away from the Gulf of Alaska, with no weather stations in the area. Due to the high elevation, unexpected storms could result in two to three feet of snow in a day, easily stranding a mountain climbing party.

It was a matter of hiring a helicopter to do a search. When they were located, it usually meant the helicopter placing me on a ridge in the area and then ferrying them and their camp out to their vehicles or to where the snow ended in the valley. Then, they would come back and take me out. It was a lonely experience with my rifle and backpack, waiting for the helicopter to return.And when Icouldn't hear the sound of the helicopter in the thin air at that elevation,Iwould hope and pray that the pilot had a great geographic memory of where he had placed me to be able to take the mountain climbers to where they wanted to be flown. I had the pleasure of being up close and personal with the upthrust of rock that is the second-highest mountain in North America, led by Mount Denali in Alaska, which is 19,685 feet or 6,000 meters.

We had a lot of fires in the Yukon my first summer, and trying to get used to the sun being in the sky for over five months of perpetual daylight was a bit of an adjustment to your sleeping patterns and shift scheduling. I arrived in late August, and the sun went along the horizon in the North for a few hours and then back up into the sky for the rest of the 24 hours. We were trying to line up firefighters and handled that by parking the station wagon in the alley behind the bars. We had five liquor outlets: the liquor store and four bars with live entertainment.

The next thing was to run the other police car with the siren and lights going full blast up and down Main Street. Those we flushed out were invited to become firefighters and were placed in the station wagon and headed out to the fire line.

Five of these were taken out to join the fire crew on a forest fire that was southeast of Dawson City, about 20 miles away. I also conveyed groceries to the firefighting camp. They were fighting the fire with aerial bombers and pumping and spraying water from the creeks in the area. It was figured that the fire was endangering the community and needed more firefighters.

I hardly got back to Dawson City when we got a radio message that the firefighters that I had delivered had left the camp with a lot of the groceries and wanted them arrested if possible. I was detailed to be in charge of seeing if I could arrest them. I went to the camp and followed the track of the five of them. About five miles from the Forestry Camp, I spotted them in a grove of spruce trees at the top of a slight hill with a large fire going and cooking their dinner. I was contemplating how I was going to arrest five men as I only had two pairs of handcuffs.

My attention was taken up bythe sound of an approaching aircraft and the sound of the engines going into fine pitch. I was immediately lying on the ground behind a big tree about 100 feet away from the fire and the five men. I recognized that they had spotted the smoke and were about to extinguish the fire by dropping a load of water and chemicals. Knowing that the plane would be in a dive and going at 250 miles per hour, I lay on the ground behind this big tree to give me the best shelter from what I anticipated was going to happen. The roar of the plane went overhead, and then all hell broke loose with the orange water and flying broken branches going past me. Even with the protection of the tree, it ripped the back of my jacket and shirt off.

The problem of how to take five local Natives in custody was solved as they had all been standing looking directly at the approaching aircraft, and they all needed medical treatment. Some had pieces of branches stuck into them, and most were bleeding from their wounds. I managed to help remove the sticks and branches from their wounds and used a couple of slices of bread to take up the blood. I made bandages from parts of their jackets and shirts.

I had no trouble convincing them that it was only five miles back to the camp and about 10 to 15 miles to Dawson City through the bush and over or around a mountain. We would be able to get them to the hospital for further treatment with my vehicle back near the Forestry Camp. We took what canned food we could locate back to the camp, and I had them at the hospital within three hours. They got a month in jail when it all came to court, and I escorted them to Whitehorse on the scheduled flight a week later.

About this time, Seconey Mobile Oil Company was assembling the equipment to have 35 oil rig camps doing shallow wells to try and find out the extent of the oil field that they figured was in the Eagle Plain. The area in question was located 150 miles out of Dawson and was bounded on the west by the Ogilvie Mountains and the Richardson Mountains on the east. It extended north for almost two hundred miles. Access to the area was going south of Dawson City to the junction of the Dempster Highway, which ended at the time at Chapman Lake, about 100 miles north. Currently, it goes to Fort McPherson, and barges take the cars across the Peel River. Then, the road goes east to the Arctic Red River, where ferries take vehicles across the mighty Mackenzie River and head north to Inuvik and then north again to Tuktoyuktuck and the Beaufort Sea of the Arctic Ocean.

From the Chapman Lake area, they were to push a road and do a crisscross of seismic lines. They were waiting until freeze-up and going to make a main road by blading off the permafrost on the seismic lines straight north towards Old Crow, with seismic lines going east and west off this main road about every five miles.

Having done quite a bit of flying for Forestry spotting and assessing fires, I had become familiar with a great portion of the area around Dawson City. They wanted to have an aircraft available for resupply and emergency medical evacuation from the area, and I suggested marking the Seela Pass so they didn't have to climb over the 8,000-foot mountain barrier. It was decided that they would paint 4' x 8' by ¾ inch plywood fluorescent orange and screw them together so the snow would not accumulate on either side. They would then put them 500 feet apart up through the pass. They brought in a big helicopter, and it took two of us to erect the signboards. They dropped the two sheets of painted plywood off at about the right distance apart, and we aligned them and screwed them together with short angled blocks the entire length of the pass.



We had a change of Pentecostal ministry in Dawson in the early fall. The new minister discovered that Dawson City had a live house of prostitution operating and suggested it was being ignored by the police. It had been in operation for more than sixty years, dating back to the Klondike Gold Rush days. All her cousins from Montreal dutifully underwent weekly venereal disease checks at the hospital.

The minister penned a letter to the Minister of Justice in Ottawa asking why the RCMP wasallowing this "House of ill Repute" to continue operating in 1964. The woman was subsequently arrested and charged with living off the avails of prostitution. She paid her small fine and retired to Seattle. Within a few months, the incidence of venereal disease flourished in the Native population as they enjoyed the huge monetary input from the rig workers and free access to drinking establishments.

There was a huge salmon run up the Yukon River, and there were a number of fish reels and netting operations. The local Natives would slit them open flat, hang them on sticks, and smoke them over low smokey fires. With the oil rigs and crews beginning to assemble and all the partying taking place at the bars, the fires were not being attended to, and most of the fish rotted. The wind blew from all directions, and every grizzly and black bear headed into Dawson City to get in on the rotten fish they could smell.

In just over two weeks, I killed five black bears and three grizzly bears right in town. I was detailed to finish them off as the Native's 30-30s just aggravated them. I had a .405 Winchester and a .264 Winchester Magnum that dealt with the grizzlies, and the .308 Detachment rifle was adequate for the black bears. The local Natives would shoot the bears and not kill them, and they would bother their dog lines, shoot at their dogs, and release some of their dogs from their lines. I could tell the location of the grizzly when I could see part of a dog coming above the house from a swipe from the wounded grizzly and the continuous barking of the dogs.

The days shortened, the temperature began to plummet, and we insulated the vehicle engines and limited the air intake area of the radiator to provide more inside temperature for the police vehicles. We put a layer of insulation in front of the passenger compartment down the back of the engine. We began to wear more layers of clothing and carry our "Five Star" sleeping bags with us wherever we drove. On the 15th of November, it went down to -50 degrees Fahrenheit.

One of the members presented me with a picture of the coldest temperature ever recorded in the Yukon: minus 80 degrees Fahrenheit at Mayo on the 4th of January 1940. I began to seriously question the sanity of "applying to go North" on that day. Mayo was only about 80 miles away on the Stewart River, which flowed into the Yukon River about 90 miles south, meaning we were lower and possibly colder. The snow crystals formed on everything, and with the still air, they grew to about three inches. Without the sun coming up to melt them, they continued to take all the moisture out of the air. The crystals on the power lines were beautiful white loops between the power poles.

 

The Canadian Pacific Airlines continued to run even in the cold weather. They left one engine running after the other while they were on the ground. I was at the airport to pick up the mail and offered rides to anyone who needed one. I was talking to the pilot and asked him how he found the airport. He said with the still air and the power lines and telephone line on the west side of the road, and the pilot seat on the left side of the aircraft, he just kept following the huge crystals on the lines.

About five minutes later, a very irate semi-truck driver burst into the terminal and went directly over to the pilot, shouting, "If you're going to follow the highway, you'd better learn to drive on the correct side of the road because I saw you coming on my side and had to take the ditch!"

The temperature continued to get colder in Dawson City until it was minus 64 degrees below zero. I encountered colder temperatures but not recorded as the thermometer only went to -70, and the mercury was in the bottom of the globe. The cleared area on the windshield from the defrost began to grow smaller, the heater was not able to keep us warm, and we began seeing our breath in the cab of the truck. My partner, who had been in the North for 25 years, figured it was between 75 and 80 degrees below on the Fahrenheit scale.

The problem with the cold temperatures was that I never saw it above the -50 degree mark until the 17th of March 1965. I got a real charge out of coming to Edmonton and seeing bumper stickers that read, "I SURVIVED THE WINTER OF 65." It had only been down to -40 for less than a week.

I came from a town with 600 people that had four bars with live entertainment and dancing allowed, and beer and any sort of hard liquor drinks sold. I did a mental patient escort out to Edmonton and went to a bar. All you could have was beer, and they served a table full of little beer glasses for $11.00. I had to go to the toilet. On the way back, I saw another person I knew and went to talk to him. They dumped all of my beer and threw me out because I didn't go directly from the bathroom to my own table. The other part of the bar was for ladies and escorts, which I found a bit archaic, as drinking in Newfoundland was really open and a social event with music and dancing.

During the winter, most of our patrols were part of the 300 miles of roads that were maintained to provide assistance to anyone stranded by the cold. We had a lot of miners who worked their claims over the winter. They did this by going underground by digging a shaft down to the "pay dirt," loosening it, hauling it to the shaft, and raising it to the surface with a winless winch system. They stored it so they could either sluice it in a "rocker box" in the comfort of their cabin or in the spring when the water was running, feed it into the sluice box, and collect the gold.

That winter, I found two of them dead as they had run out of wood to keep themselves warm. One had a really small cabin built into the creek bank with a very narrow and short doorway. He had died on his bunk, and his legs and one arm were down over the sides of the narrow bed, and the other arm was hanging straight up against a shelf on the wall. My first job was getting him off the bunk and then trying to thread this two-hundred-pound short man out through the doorway by undressing him down to his long johns. I got him out of the doorway and into the station wagon. His cabin was 39 miles up Bonanza Creek, and our police car radio range was about 10miles at the best of times.

The next thing I heard was a fight betweenthe undertaker and the welfare department because he wanted the amount of money to heat his facilities to thaw him out, get him into a casket, and get him ready for burial in the spring.

I had one trip up Hunker Creek to check on a miner who was still working on his claim. There was little to no snow clearing on the roads and trails that led up the creeks. The creeks froze all the water that usually ran in them, so I had chains on the back tires for traction on the ice, as well as the front tires to assist in steering. Every time there was a frozen riffle and a bit of a climb up the rise to the next level of the creek, you had to get going at a pretty good rate to make it up. We also took along their grocery order that they had arranged at the store for their mid-winter groceries.

I got to the next level and found the cabin with a slight wisp of smoke still coming out of the chimney, which was a good sign. I went to the door and figured he must be really sick because the vehicle was only about 50 feet away from the cabin. I opened the door, and he was still lying on the bunk.

I identified myself, and he sat bolt upright and looked at me. He related that he had just put his last stick of wood in the stove and lay down, prepared to freeze to death. With the extreme cold, he had used up all of the wood he had cut to last out the winter, and it had been too cold to try and cut some more wood. He thought he had already died and gone to heaven because the frost on the windows kept periodically lighting up and then going dark. I guess with the number of times I attempted to make it up the last riffle, the headlights were crossing back and forth across the cabin, giving him that effect.

We packed up everything he had in the cabin. His tools were down his shaft, and he gave me his carbide light and his hand gold scales. I bought his gold scales, which were in a nice glass cabinetry. I took him back to Dawson City with me and to the seniors' lodge.

When I was at Carcross, two of the local Natives who were part of the original discovery of gold on Rabbit Creek, later known as Bonanza Creek, were living there. They used to accompany dancers and singers to the train station to entertain the tourists who came up from Skagway off the cruise ships. The dancers and singers dressed up in their local costumes and performed for the tourists. Skookum Jim and Tagish Charly would tell their stories about the discovery of the gold. Skookum Jim got the name by carrying 150 pounds of bacon in one load up the pass back in 1900. I bought his .256 Newton rifle from him and still have that rifle in my collection.

If I was in town when the tourist train arrived, I was expected to appear in my "Red Serge," but I honestly managed to be busy and not available for a lot of the tourist sessions over the summer. The Yukon Tourist Department paid a lot of the locals to provide a tour of the "Tushi," which was a paddle-wheeler road that was on a dry dock in the settlement. It used to provide a hundred-mile trip down and back to Ben-Mi-Cree, where the tourists stayed overnight until about 1959, when it was dry-docked and Ben-Mi-Cree was closed. The local Native organization wanted the Tourist Department to turn the money over to them, and when they refused, the boat mysteriously caught fire and burned a few years after I left Carcross.

I used to take a small bottle of rum with me for the old collection of miners' coffee. I would listen to the stories they openly related on how they got to the gold rush and where some of them struck it rich. Invariably, they spent it all hiring people to look for the "Mother Lode" (where all that gold came from). I was told that I could not bring them any more things to drink by the matron or I would no longer be welcomed to the lodge.

I informed the three English nurses (whomI had meals with at the hospital), and they wanted to listen to their stories. As they were questioning the old miners who came into the hospital, most of them were not that lucid with old age and whatever malady they suffered that brought them to the hospital. So,for several times each month, four of us would spend a couple of hours listening to them relate how it really was in the Klondike.

Invariably, Pete Brady would have to relate his short trip to heaven when I rescued him from freezing to death in his cabin.

I told the nurses about going over to the seniors' lodge and the fun I had listening to them tell their stories of what really happened all over the Klondike. They would accompany me, and their nurses' duty bags were never once questioned. They all were making notes to send the stories back home to parents and relatives who had gone to the Klondike to seek their fortunes, as well as friends back in England. The 10 and sometimes 15 old-timers joined the coffee session and bragging session, and they kept correcting one another on who and where they had mentioned different people who were no longer there. So it was kept awfully close to the truth on some of the events on the different creeks as to the amount of gold recovered and how the placer mining took place. The majority of them had come over the Chilcoot Pass in 1900, and they all mentioned that the NWMP had saved their lives by making them endure the hauling of all that food and equipment up the mountain.

I now just wish that I had made notes like the nurses had. We had to listen to Pete Brady's story of how I brought him back from heaven to live another few days every time we went to the lodge. In 1932, he and his big brother, Pat, had found a 13-ounce nugget at Mint Creek, two above Discovery on Hunker Creek, and they went off to New York to lead the St. Patrick's Day Parade. I had a few drinks with Pete on the 17th of March when the temperature went above -50 degrees below zero for the first time since November 15th.

Having gone to Banff and received my Mountain Rescue course and had all kinds of safety and mountain climbing equipment, I decided that I had to tackle a mountain that had never been climbed in human history. It was Tombstone Mountain, which is a 2,192-meter elevation (7,192 feet). It is a basalt spire that is all above the tree line and is located in the Ogilvie Mountains about 25 miles west of Chapman Lake at the end of the Dempster Highway and 75 miles northeast of Dawson City.

Getting someone to accompany me on this mountain climbing expedition turned into a bit of a problem. I got one of the bank employees interested, but he got transferred to Whitehorse. The next chap employed with the Department of Highways also got transferred. I approached the son of the local helicopter owner, and the very next day, his father was at the Detachment and told me in no uncertain terms that he had a lot of money invested in his son's helicopter training. He was going to take over the business as he was planning to retire and was not willing to risk him on taking up mountain climbing.

I finally convinced one of the chaps from the Department of Transport to accompany me on the climb. We drove my vehicle to Chapman Lake and packed our camp into the base of Tombstone Mountain. We did the easy climb. When we were at the top, I noticed a pile of rocks holding a short piece of a post with an old telephone box attached to it. I had seen similar boxes in the museum. I opened the front of the box and there was a note that said, "FRANK PHONE HOME."

My would-be mountain climbing partner's father had flown his helicopter to the top of the mountain. He had flown one of their helicopters some seventy-five miles with the telephone and short pole and planted it on the top of the mountain. At least I can say that I was one of the first people who ever climbed that mountain.

The Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation, in the early 1900s, built a ditch that took water from over by the Ogilvie Mountains and into the Klondike area with the idea of using that water to run sluice boxes to recover the gold. They also sold the water to other miners on different creeks in the area. On a couple of the mountain valleys, they had huge redwood pipes with metal bands supporting the pipe, and a company was removing the expensive wood. They had made roads alongside the ditches for the trucks to haul all of the wood and metal bands.

 

I drove my vehicle some 20 miles to hunt for ptarmigan and grouse. I was walking along the roadway, and the next thing I knew, two grizzly bear cubs were on the far bank of the ditch. They both started to yell and then the mother grizzly was headed down the road as fast as she could run towards me. I had the shotgun loaded with three birdshots. I had taken the plug out and it was followed with one buckshot and then one slug for just such a predicament. It was a semi-automatic Browning shotgun.

I fired one shot over her, figuring that would scare her, but it only increased her gait towards me. I let the second and third go right at her head, figuring it would at least blind her, but she did not slow at all. The next buckshot did nothing to slow her gait, and the slug went into her open mouth and came out the back of her head. She took two leaps past me and into a pile of fur.

I took the fish and game back to the scene and captured the two cubs that were still with the mother. They ended up in a zoo when they grew up. That is one of the closest calls that I had with a grizzly with cubs, and I would not like to repeat this situation.