Having been involved with firearms for most of my life and was allowed to use a .22 single-shot rifle when I was just eight years old. Right at dusk, I was at the very back of our property and I was trying to shoot some partridges that were picking holes in the apples that were on the trees in that area. I was sitting in the crotch of a cedar rail fence, waiting for the partridge to come in and pick holes in the apples in a tree about fifty feet from where I was sitting.I heard the shuffle of leaves behind me, got the rifle at the ready, and pointed at the tree;a big buck deer jumped over the fence,landed in the sight alignment and looked around at me.And I pulled the trigger and shot him in the eye, and he dropped dead.I did not know what to do with a dead dear and got called for supper at about that time.

I guess I was shifting around while sitting at the table, and my father asked me what was wrong. I blurted out that I had just shot a big buck deer by the apple trees. He questioned me when and where, and I told him by the apple trees at the back fence. It happened just about the time I was called to come to supper. He jumped up and said, "Then let's go and get him." That was the first of many I got, and it seemed we always had wild game meat hanging down in someone's well in the neighborhood over the years.

When I was in high school and joined the Army Cadets, I shot in the Eastern Canada competition and won. This qualified me to go to Bisley, England, and shoot the .303 Lee-Enfields on the range up to 1000 yards. I have a badge on my shooting jacket for the "highest Score in the Unit." I had a little Remington pump .22 rifle and got so good I could throw a baby food can in the air and keep it going up by continuing to hit it with each shot.

I took several gunsmithing courses, and in one of them, in order to pass the exam, they gave you a block of metal, a hacksaw, different shaped files, and a drill bit that fit a .22 short caliber. They also gave you pictures of a number of small single-shot pistols. You were to make a pistol, and when you could show that it fired one shell, you passed the course. I put it in the vice and used an elastic band to provide the power for the hammer and fired it remotely a number of times before taking it to the teacher to display my handiwork. I still have it in my collection.

At one time, I was building up a collection of every caliber that Winchester made a rifle for. I got it complete and sold it off to a collector. It is mentioned in another chapter where I built up the .219 Zipper Improved varmint rifle that I put together. I have been reloading for five different calibers since I was 14 years of age. Currently, I have 40 rifles, shotguns, pistols, and revolvers in my collection, and a lot of them are antiques. I have swaged and poured thousands of bullets for reloading by melting down used wheel weights and other lead objects to make my own bullets.

When I was in training, I hadmy name on the McBrine Cup for having the highest score during recruit training. I helped the instructor try to teach the members of our troop how to shoot. Before the Emergency Response Teams, I was on the "Sniper Counter Sniper" team. Every two weeks, you had to shoot a Crow target at 250 yards, and if you did not submit your target, you were kicked off the team. I have four of the Certificates signed by different Commissioners of the Force where, over my 33 years of service, I shot "Possibles" with both rifle and revolver during the Annual Shoot. To describe what a "Possible" is,you have the bullseye on the target, and then inside the bullseye, there is that area called the "C-X" ring. All ten shots have to hit or touch the "C-X" ring with the revolver and the rifle during the competition at the Annual Shoot. So, from all that bragging, you have to realize that I seem to know where I am sending my lead when the gun goes off.

Over the years, in response to my continual insistence on providing a better handgun for the members in the field, my plea was always with officers well up the ranking structure. They always seemed to phone me because they didn't want anything in print. Their greatest fear was equipping members with bigger weapons and more bullets without being able to train everyone to shoot properly and accurately. They realized that most of the members didn't have aninterest in learning to shoot properly or the ability that I had. Giving them more bullets in a handgun with a lot more power brought on the fear of a lot more collateral damage from stray bullets into the general public and civil suits that would result.

When they went to the 9mm over the .38 Special, they almost doubled the muzzle velocity and punched that the bullet had on impact. So, it was a lot more of a usable weapon for all types of enforcement. I was promoting the .357 as the ideal weapon because you could still fire the .38 Special loads for a cheaper practice round and then have the stopping power when you needed it. The .357 bullets had the stopping power, accuracy, and ability to drive a bullet out to 200 yards without having to loop it to the target, which happens with the .38 Special.

As I most often packed my .357 for years with my own homebrew ammunition, I was at a roadblock, and the stolen vehicle was going around our police vehicle. I fired one into the engine compartment when they went past me, and they coasted to a halt about 200 feet away. We were there at their doors to invite them out. The bullet had gone through two thicknesses of metal of the fender and then the inside of the wheel well, then into the block through two thicknesses of the antifreeze chamber, breaking into the cylinder wall before the piston came back up, and the engine destroyed itself in seconds. That was a good example of what the .357 Magnum could do to stop a vehicle.

When I was in Newfoundland, I had a roommate in barracks. They had found the four prisoners whohad escaped from the prison in St. John's. He and his partner had caught them trying to break into a hardware store in a small town outside of St. John's. He had gone back to the police car to radio for more help, and they jumped the other member, kicked him into unconsciousness, and took his revolver. When he came back around the corner, they shot and killed him. The attitude of the chap whodid the shooting when he was in the detachment cells was shouting out that if we gave him a gun, he would shoot six more of us. It was right after that I started carrying my own homebrews, where I drilled a hole down into the nose of the bullet and filled it with mercury and then a thin lead plug taped over the mercury. If I hit and wounded anyone, he was going to die from the mercury poison if the bullet didn't take him out. I know it sounds a bit sadistic, but that was how I felt at the time by losing my best friend and partner.

He and I shared the same room in the barracks for six or seven months, and he was a recruit right out of training. He was the sort of guy whowent to church twice on Sunday, didn't swear, and obviously had a pretty sheltered upbringing as an only child. He came right out of high school and joined the force. I introduced him to the student nurses at the hospital residence, attended the dances there, and did a bit of life in the pubs. We went fishing together and bird hunting, skeet, and trap shooting, and he was always on for the shore party and enjoyed the meals of lobster and scallops when I went scuba diving. What I didn't know when he was killed was that he sort of thought that I was the big brother that he never had when he was growing up.

We worked together to solvesome major break-ins by simply sleeping in the warehouses. We caught them in the act instead of trying to find out who was responsible later on. In a few months, we took quite a few gang members out of the circuit. We were leading most of the Detachment with solved crimes working together. I was coaching hockey at the time, and he was into figure skating. He worked alongside me with our fundraising schemes to raise money for equipment. He was instructing the kids on some of the finer points of stopping, balancingon the blades, and conditioning for skating that I didn't know. I was coaching the kids from the Mount Cashel Orphanage at the time.

What I didn't know at the time was that he had been continually writing letters to his parents, relating all of the new ventures he experienced hanging out with me. The Force sent me to Ottawa to escort his body and give the eulogy at the funeral service for him. I was in full red serge. His mother showed me all of the letters he had written, and she read several of her favorites about some of the fun we had together.

His parents came to visit me twice when I was in Newfoundland. They drove down in their camper, and I learned that he was a retired Baptist Minister. When I went to the Yukon, they came to visit me in Dawson City. I guess they sort of took me as their lost son.

On their way home from the Yukon trip, they had an accident and were hit by an impaired driver in Toronto who was going the wrong way on the Don Valley Parkway. They were both killed. One of the Toronto Metro Police officers phoned me after locating a stack of letters in the camper with my name and address in the Yukon, wondering if I knew any of the next of kin. I could only tell him that he was a retired Baptist Minister and was able to give him the address of the church. They had a lot of family attend the funeral of their son in 1964.

I have wandered around all across Canada for more than 33 years with a loaded .38 Special or a loaded .357 Magnum at times, and I have never fired or injured anybody or fired a shot in anger directly at anyone. You can talk up a pretty disastrous story, knowing full well that the best you could do was to deafen them a little and cause some aggravation at the wound entry point. I did not bother talking up the center-of-mass shooting description. I would cover between the eyes, shooting, and that was usually enough to convince them that I was serious. When they were left with the preference forthe left or right eye, I usually had them convinced that I was in control of the situation. I would offer that it had six bullets, and I was going to use them all up if I started with one.

I was involved in a bank robbery vehicle chase and also with a stolen vehicle. I shot out both back tires from the passenger seat position, but they kept going, obviously a little slower on the slowly deflating rear tires. I thought that if I shot out the rear window, they would consider that we were getting serious as they were heading back to town. Three shots later, the tempered glass window did not shatter. I examined the three lead streak marks on the glass and took some photographs that I intended to use against the Force to get a replacement .38 Special firearm. They went off the road as a result of the one totally flat tire, and when they went off the road, they hit a big tree. The ambulances took them all away as nobody had their seatbelts on as they were getting ready to jump out and run. There was a major inquiry over that one, and a lot of statements were taken by several levels of management. I forgot to mention or point out the lead marks on the back window.

The .38 Special was good for punching paper up to about 20 yards. After that, you take more of the front sight and "loop" your bullet at the target. I always felt that you could cause more of an injury to the opponent if you threw it at him. After that incident, my preference became my .357 Magnum "Highway Patrolman" with my own home loads that have some serious stopping power. At least it made a heck of a lot more noise.

I have a .357 Magnum with a 10 ½ inch barrel that I have won several competitions with, doing silhouette shooting at 50 – 100 and 200-yard targets. You cannot run up to the nearer target until you hear the clang of the bullet hitting the target, and you only have six rounds to do that round with. The target is shaped out of ¼ inch steel to the actual size of a turkey, a smaller pig, and a smaller deer.

The snub-nosed .38 with the 2-inch barrel that wasissued to the members in plain clothes duties were totally useless, much beyond ten yards for accuracy. Again, I felt you could cause more damage if you threw it at the suspect. They made a hell of a flash and a lot of noise because a lot of the gunpowder was still burning when the bullet had already left the short barrel.

Over the years, I submitted report after report trying to get the Force to go into a semi-automatic pistol because you could have ten and fifteen-round clips with the different manufacturers mainly because most of the members are not proficient with a handgun and also, the Force limited the number of shells available for practice. In response to that memorandum, they issued more bullets in speed loaders, and all that did was add more weight to our duty belts.

At one time, you had to account for every shell that was issued to you. It was not uncommon for some of the senior NCO members to come to the Annual Shoot with green brass shells that had been in their revolvers for years without being fired or cleaned. They were not interested in becoming proficient with their revolvers and had avoided Annual Shoots, so their revolvers spent most of their lifetime locked in a filing cabinet in their office.

I was interested in remaining proficient with shooting accuracy, so I reloaded my own ammunition and gathered up the old brass from the shoots. I also collected used wheel weights from local tire stores, melted them down, and cast my own bullets. This way, I was ready for gopher patrol and could practice shooting my revolver regularly, all while keeping my ammunition costs reasonable.

In one of my submissions to the Force, I proposed acquiring a more effective handgun for a service weapon. I took seven two-gallon tins, filled them completely with water, and screwed the lids on tightly. The firearms were discharged from about ten yards back, directly parallel to the cans. After firing different police weapons into the center of each tin container, I submitted pictures with one of my reports, including the feet-per-second muzzle velocity for each cartridge.

The .38 Special created a hole the size of abullet, with water coming out of the hole only on one side of the front of the tin. The water stopped the bullet within the width of the tin in about four inches, with slight bulging on the other side. The muzzle velocity was 675 ft/second.

The 9 mm created a hole through both sides, with a small hole in the front and a slightly larger hole at the back. The muzzle velocity was 1,100 ft/second.

The .40 mm had a larger hole in the front and about a two-inch hole in the back, with the tin turned back around the exit hole. The muzzle velocity was 1,551 ft/second.

The .357 Magnum caliber had a one-inch hole in the front and about an eight-inch hole in the back, with the metal turned back around the exit hole. The muzzle velocity was 1,500 ft/second.

The .45 caliber had the same size hole in the front as the bullet, and the can was split on the side where the seam was, with no exit hole. The muzzle velocity was 859 ft/second.

The .44 Magnum had about a one-inch hole in the front, and the rest of the can was completely turned inside out, with a cloud of mist 20 feet around the tin. Surprisingly, it was still sitting in the same place, with the top and the back of the tin curled around the front. This was with hollow-point ammunition. The muzzle velocity was 1,550 ft/second.

I then put a plug in the .38 Special tin, filled it back up with water, and shot it with a .308 police rifle, hitting the wooden plug where the bullet entered. Nothing was left of the front of the tin; it was completely torn apart in every direction. The front of the tin was shredded and wrapped around the sides, as well as the top and bottom, and it jumped about three feet in the air when hit. The same spray of misty water accompanied the blast (3,358 ft/second), with the 180-grain bullet delivering 2,913 foot-pounds of energy.

I then fired a 12-gauge shotgun with “Double-00” buckshot at the tin, which was propelled about 20 feet away. Examination of the tin revealed that it had nine holes the size of the buckshot on both the front and back. The total shocking power it represented, as evidenced by the tin being carried 20 feet away, was significant (1,850 ft/second), producing 1,575 foot-pounds of energy, which is three times that of the .357 Magnum revolver and twice the energy of the .44 Magnum revolver.

I had included a picture with three lead streaks on the rear window of the stolen vehicle, but no one took much notice of how that picture was taken or questioned when the photograph was captured in response to that report. I received a memo stating that, due to financial restrictions within the Force, no consideration would be given to re-arm the members, along with a thank you for my time and effort. From the time of the first memos in 1965 or 1966 until they finally started issuing the 9 mm semi-automatic Smith & Wesson Model 5946 with 10-round clips, retiring the .38 Specials six-shot revolvers took nearly twenty-nine years.

Looking at further revolvers issued by the Force, initially, only the officers carried swords, and their revolvers were the Webley .442 caliber, which wastop-break and self-extracting of spent cartridges. They were “double action,” meaning that pulling the trigger rotated the cylinder, bringing up the next active round while cocking the hammer. Further pressure on the trigger released the hammer onto the centerfire portion of the primer.

In contrast, the “single action” action of its predecessor required you to manually pull back the hammer to cock it; then, pressure on the trigger released the hammer to strike the primer of the cartridge.

Some rifles were issued to different posts; initially, they were the Sniper-Enfield Mark II, which was a single-shot breach-loading .577 caliber rifle. Around 1888, a number of Winchester Model 1876 rifles in various calibers, including .45-60, .45-70, and .45-90, were purchased. These were repeating shot rifles that held six cartridges, complete with a saddle ring. This caused a dangerous situation with similar cartridges that could jam in one of the other caliber rifles, preventing the action from closing fully. Professional tools were required to remove the jammed cartridge.

They continued to purchase the Winchester Model 1876, but matching the bullet caliber with the rifle continued to plague the far-flung posts, as the caliber was displayed very lightly on the bottom flat portion of the cartridge. The caliber was also displayed faintly on a brass plate on the bottom of the receiver, which could be misidentified as one of many calibers such as .44, .44-40, .45-70, .44 WCF, .38, or .32 caliber.