The flood caught everyone by surprise as the river ice broke in the middle of the night. I got up, dressed, and went from my room into the office. Looking out the window, I saw that the river ice was level with the top of the dike, which was the road past the Detachment. It was periodically stopping and then slowly inching forward. Dawson City is located right where the Klondike River dumps into the Yukon River, and in years past, the site of the settlement was likely the delta of the Klondike River. The roadway along the Klondike River and then the Yukon River had been raised about ten feet to prevent the water and the river ice from coming into town and extended the entire length of the town. They had flood water from the Klondike River in 1925 to enter the settlement. When they built the road between Whitehorse and Dawson City, they had the river road built higher to prevent flooding.

 

I had been present when they dug a hole in the ice earlier in the winter to test the ice, as they were intent on taking big trucks over to the asbestos mine being developed over at Clinton Creek. The ice was fifteen feet thick and was deemed safe for all traffic. We had an extended period of three weeks when the temperature had been -65°F. It had also gone down to -50°F on the 20th of November and did not come above that temperature until the 17th of March. It was my first winter in the Yukon, and there were many days when I questioned my decision to apply to go North. We dressed for the cold and planned any activities well around the extreme cold. I insulated the motors of the police cars to get some heat inside and defrost the windshield. The only time they were shut off was when we were filling up with gasoline or when they went into the garage for an oil change. We did a lot of patrolling up the creeks to check on the miners who worked their claims by tunneling underground and bringing the “pay dirt” to the surface for sluicing the gold out in the spring. We were always conveying food to them to stock up on their grub stake as they always had a food credit at the local store. We would patrol the creeks, take along their groceries, and check on their welfare. But some of those stories are for another time.

As I was watching the ice in the river, the side of a huge pan of ice roseabout six feet above the road and came partly across the road. The Yukon River, where it passes Dawson City, is between a half and three-quarters of a mile across, and it is fairly straight for about ten miles to the south. Then there is a bend to straight north, and about two miles further, there is an island in the middle of the river.

The Detachment building had the Cpl.’s married quarters that werea split level with a set of stairs leading to the access to the garage and back door, with the security bay garage attached at the back and a set of cement steps leading to the cells in the basement. There were three steps up from the office to the married quarters. My room was directly off the office, and access to the second bedroom was through my room.

To get to the basement, I had to go up the three steps through the married quarters, down a half flight of steps to the back entry, and then down eight steps to the door of the basement where the furnace was located, as well as the cells with the night guard looking after the prisoner(s). I was watching out the front window at the movement of the ice in the river, and you could hear the creaking and grating of the ice on the roadway. Suddenly, the guard let out a big yell and a very loud shout, repeatedly calling my name. I made my way through the Cpl.’s quarters and down the stairs to the basement, only to find the guard in the corner of the basement on his hands and knees in about six inches of water. There was a four-inch column of water going right to the ceiling and spraying all over. The prisoner was standing on his bunk, shouting to be let out. I asked the guard what he was looking for, and he said the key ring for the cell. He said he was sitting on his chair with it well leaned back and the key ring in his left hand when the gush of water hit him in the face and the keys went off into the corner. I told him I had better turn off the power to the furnace before he got electrocuted. I went in search of the electrical panel, finally found it in the front entry, shut the whole thing off, and went to my room to get my flashlight. Returning to the basement, now in total darkness, I joined the guard in the search for the key. By this time, there was over a foot of freezing water in the basement with a continuous spray from the spout of water from the basement drain spreading all over the room. Trying to orient myself with the flashlight beam, I went over to the prisoner to assure him that we would be getting him out quickly. He was standing on his bunk babbling along in the “Gwich’in” language, which I did not understand, but it sounded threatening. By this time, there was more than a foot of dirty water all over the floor, and the guard was still on his hands and knees, feeling around on the floor for the keys. Flashing the light around to orient myself and avoid the torrent of water shooting up from the floor drain, I caught a glimpse of the keyring near the books on the bench. I retrieved the key and opened the cell door, and by this time, the prisoner was crying and yelling at the top of his lungs. I piggybacked him to the stairs so he did not even get wet. By this time, the water was up over our knees. I changed my pants and socks and put on dry shoes. I took the police car, prisoner, and guard to his home so he could get changed out of his totally wet clothing.

We stopped for coffee at his cabin because he always had a really big pot of coffee brewing on the stove. He put a pound of coffee in this big tapered pot, and it continuously brewed on the back of the stove. As he drank it down, he added water and kept it brewing, and this was only, as he called it, “three times coffee.” When we came back towards the Detachment, the dike had been breached, with about six inches of water running over the dike the entire length of the town.

The backwater valve had obviously malfunctioned with the pressure of the twelve feet of water built up in the river and the drain that led from the basement to the river. We were then involved in moving the police cars, as well as my own car, boat, and trailer, to high ground. We also moved all of the stuff in the warehouse to higher shelves. Prior to the Alaska Highway being built, Dawson City had been the headquarters for the Yukon Sub/Division, and everything was stocked in the warehouse there. When Whitehorse became the new headquarters, there was no road connecting them, and freighting everything upriver by barge and paddlewheel boat was too expensive, so it was left in the warehouse in Dawson City.

We had a canoe, and we were paddling all over the settlement, checking on stranded residents and conveying them to higher ground. All of the sidewalks, made with 2x6 bases and the same boards crossway all over town, had floated away from their former location, making it impossible to navigate town as there werefive feet of water all over the flat area of town. It had caught almost everyone in bed as it occurred in the early hours of the morning. The water was around for a considerable period because they had built the dike to keep the water from entering the settlement, but there was no provision to let the water out until they dug a path through the dike. The hospital and the old Administration building, which were three-story buildings, housed most of the people whose homes were flooded. We hauled food from the stores to those buildings by canoe for over a week until we got food shipped in from Whitehorse by the truckload.

When the first pan of ice ran into the island with the sharp bend north of the settlement, the back end sunk down as it shoved up onto the island, and then the next half-mile pan of ice slid up onto the first until the ice was piled 50 feet high. The same thing happened at the junction of the Klondike River. When the ice hit the bend in the dike, the pan of ice tilted, and the next pan of ice rode up onto the first. With the major blockage at the island, the water level increased until it flowed over the dike and into town.

It basically stopped the river flow until it broke through at one side of the island and washed a deeper channel in the gravel of the river bottom, leaving piles of fifteen-foot ice blocks 50-60 feet high on the island and banks of the river. Along the settlement, they drilled holes in the pans of ice and dynamited them. The river finally went down to a flood level below the height of the dike, and with the dug drain, the water slowly went down throughout the town, and things returned to somewhat normal. The prisoner and I hauled the wooden planked sidewalks back to their original position and wired and stapled them to the buildings with about five feet of slack. Later in the summer, we had the fire truck wash most of them, and we painted them all down both sides of the main street.