The name of the Sixty Mile River comes from the fact that it is located that distance up the Yukon River from Dawson City and in the Detachment area that we patrolled.This trip was whenwe went there to measure some claims, and our night guard accompanied me. He was planning to do some prospecting, and he got some financial support from the Yukon Government if he hired a Native cook who had just finished his six-month sentence and worked along with me in refurbishing the RCMP cemetery and other Municipal projects and became fairly close friends even after I taught him how to do a hard days’ work.When we were shovelling gravel, I would challenge him to try and shovel the same number of shovels full of gravel into the back of the station wagon that was setup with a heavy tarpaulin in the back of the vehicle.

I believe that I should give some background of our night guard.He and his brother came from Ukraine to Canada,got the lure of the Klondike Gold Rush, and made their way to Dawson City in the 1930s;by that time, the gold rush was over, and only menial jobs were available.They set themselves up to supply cordwood for the dozens of steamboats that still plied the Yukon River.They would choose a landing site for the boats and cut and stack the cordwood in full view, and the boats would pull in and take one or two cords of wood and leave the money in a baking powder tin.He lost his brother when a bank of the river collapsed, and he was swept away and drowned.

He next set himself up in a grocery and produceddelivery service to the miners whowere still working their claims during the summer, up and down the river and creeks by boat and in the winter by dog teams.On one of these grocery delivery trips by dogsled to Matson Creek up the Sixty Mile River in 1946, he found John Matson dead in his cabin and then went directly toDawson City and reported it to the RCMP Detachment. 

Matson is reported to have given Klondike Kate her weight in gold for wintering with him and they later in life got married.Kate, the Belle of the Yukon, was a vaudeville singer and dancer who made her name and fortune on the saloon stages of Dawson City during the Klondike Gold Rush.

The Corporal insisted that they immediately return, and he was to act as their guide.He objected as they had a spell of good weather, and he figured that it was about to change and get much colder.On the first day out, the temperature plummeted, and on the second day of the trip, it got to minus 75 degrees Fahrenheit. He was chopping wood for the fires and the head of the axe broke in the cold, and a splinter struck him in the eye.They immediately returned to the Dawson City Hospital to have the splinter of steel removed from his eye, and it resulted in him losing the eye and a glass eye that he had to pay for himself.

Because Ottawa had not approved him as a guide, they declined any compensation or pension for his disability.It became an unwritten understanding that he became a permanent night guard.He had a permanent and very comfortable three-room log cabin atthe northeast end of the settlement.In the winter, we provided transportation to the detachment and back home after his shift, and in the summer, he walked back and forth. He had a really big coffee pot continuously parkedon the back of the stove and just kept adding water and would be offering you “six times coffee” as he kept track of the number of times he added water, not to mention where he put the egg shells until the taste of coffee had diminished, and he replaced with a whole pound of coffee.Not often you had “one-time Coffee.”

There were a number of mining operations on the Sixty Mile River, and we took the Detachment 26-foot freighter canoe with an 18 HP engine. I did a few checks on measuring the length of the claims to assist the Mining Recorder and to keep the miners from extending their mining operations into the neighbour’s claims to try and keep them honest.

On the second day, we set up our big 12-foot tent on a gentle gravel bar at the mouth of Matson Creek, and he had given the cook exact directions that he was to put the bacon grease in the water and not anywhere on the rocks on the beach.I watched him go down to the river edge, and on the back swing, there was bacon grease coming out of the frying pan and onto the beach.He then realized his mistake and threw the more obvious grease-covered rocks out into the river.

With the perpetual daylight, we decided it was time to get some sleep.We had a metal grub box that was placed in the back of the tent.It was quite warm, so no stove was set up inside the tent, and there was a metal ring where the pipe would normally go through the roof of the tent.I was on a cot on one side of the grub box,Joe was on the other side, and the cook was near the entrance. Sleeping crossways, I had a light sleeping bag with a hood, and I only had to put mosquito netting over my face to fight off the nuisance of mosquitoes and black flies.Our rifles were leaning against a tree outside the corner of the tent.

I woke up to the stinking hot breath of a huge grizzly sniffing at my face and then sniffing at the grub box and scratching it with one paw. The cook had got out of the tent after the grizzly had stepped over him and,doing so, he ran into the rope that held that end of the tent and knocked the rope off the ground stake.The front of the tent collapsed inward with the two stakes holding it erect, making exiting the tent impossible for us or the grizzly.He was then trying to reach up to the light metal stove ring and knocked the back end of the tent down ontop of us.He managed to get his nose through the hole and tore the metal ring out of the tent and had most of his head out of the tent when the cook shot him in the head, and it collapsed on top of me.Joe made a quick exit, and my problems were not over. 

 The sleeping bag had a string tied at the top, and I was able to get the zipper pulled down from the inside to my waist level and get to the string at the top, but I was still immediately underneath this 500 pound of lifeless grizzly bear with the head of the bear stuck out through the tent with the metal ring on his nose area.I was still trapped underneath the bear and flattened into the collapsed metal-rimmed cot.

They managed to get the front of the tent back up and were able to come in and assess the situation.They tied a rope around my feet, and onto the metal frame of the cot and out to the tree, and by pulling the rope sideways, I was inched out from underneath the bear.They would take up the slack in the rope and retie it to the tree, pull it sideways, and finally get me out from underneath the bear. Part of the weight of the bear was born by the metal grub box but it felt that a lot of the weight of the bear was on top of me. And it seemed that my head was forever in the armpits of that bloody bear.

When I got out and got dressed, our next problem was getting the bear out of the tent. I decided that we would collapse the tent and tie the back of it to the trees and then use the long rope down to the boat and manage to pull the bear out of the tent using the strength of the outboard motor and the current in the river.We skinned out the bear and decided that we had enough excitement for one trip and headed back home.The cook sold the hide to a tourist, so he got a five hundred dollar bonus for his trip to the Sixty Mile River.

Note 

Here is a page of pictures depicting the Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation’s Number 6 dredge working on the Yukon River near Hunker Creek and the claim post on Bonanza Creek, on the claim that I had for four years. I used to take people up to my claim, where they could pan for gold at their leisure. It was about five miles out of Dawson City. You had to make$600 worth of improvements on the claim each year. The road up Bonanza Creek ran along one side of my claim. Most of the shoulder of the creek and the bottom had already been worked out, and the only original pay dirt was high up on the shoulder of the creek where the road went along. I had the grader operator make a big parking lot off to the side of the roadway, and in doing so, he moved the overburden, did the required improvements on the claim, and exposed a thin layer of pay dirt. The five and a half ounces in that small vial came from the pay dirt and my panning. I took countless gold seekers up to that claim, allowing them to experience gold panning and realize that being a gold miner involved a lot of back-breaking labor.

That was the sixth dredge that the Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation built to deal with the depth of gravel on the Klondike River. Number 5 dredge was used on Bonanza and Eldorado Creek, but it didn’t see much use due to the limited water flow. There was only a short window of time each year when the ground thawed, and they could dredge it as it froze again with the surrounding permafrost. I don’t recall where the other dredges were used, but some might have been in Alaska. I escorted the last gold shipment in 1966, which amounted to 285 pounds of gold bars. The company shut down at that time and abandoned everything where it was. Dredge Number 5 had been put upstream on one side of the pond, but a spring flood washed it into the pond and almost buried it. The Canadian Army later made a project to recover it, digging it out and putting it above the stream area, where it is now a tourist attraction. I believe Dredge Number 6 was dismantled and taken to dredging operations along the shore of one of the bays, but after a few years, a big storm and ice blocks destroyed it.