In late summer 1964, it was decided that the police had not made their presence felt upriver on the Stewart River, which is 77 miles upstream from Dawson City and flows east for another 175 miles. I was accompanied by our night guard, who wanted to see if there wereenough beaver and fur-bearing animals to consider applying for a trapping area in the Stewart River region. We stopped at the Burian residence at the mouth of the Stewart River, where they were raising a grizzly bear cub with the idea of donating it to a zoo in Calgary. They wrestled and played with the bear, as it didn’t bite or swat at them with its claws, and enjoyed the wrestling matches. I was invited to join in and was surprised by the strength of the little animal. When the bear grabbed your legs and got you down, it just walked away as if to say, "I won that round."

There used to be a thriving town nearby, which still had an airport, and the Burian family earned their living by gold mining on one of the creeks up the Stewart River, trapping and guiding hunters in the fall. Mrs. Burian served us a great moose stew and fresh-baked bread for lunch. I left ten gallons of fuel for our return trip to Dawson City.

The current in the Stewart River is quite fast in areas with many sandbars and rapids, followed by stretches of quieter flow. On the second day, we camped in a relatively quiet area of the river. During the night, the tent collapsed on us, and we woke up to over a foot of snow. We had difficulty getting a fire going to cook breakfast, as we hadn't collected any firewood. We decided to explore some of the streams off the main river to find a good grove of spruce where we could gather dead branches and get a fire started. While cooking breakfast, my companion managed to shoot five beavers in the backwater of the creek, so we spent the rest of the day skinning them.

We found trails leading up one of the creeks and came across a mining operation. A large cat (bulldozer) was clearing the overburden, and they were sluicing out gold from the pay dirt. It was a family operation: the woman was operating the cat while her father and son were shoveling pay dirt into the sluice box. They proudly showed me a baking powder tin full of gold, which was fairly fine, with very few nuggets. The father boasted that in the past two years, the nuggets had been much bigger, allowing them to invest in the cat and cover its transportation and fuel costs. He was surprised when I took out a big tape measure to check the claim post measurements, as theirs was the only placer operation on the creek.

The next day, we visited three other creeks with active mining operations. Two German chaps who had claims on Bonanza Creek had previously given me a set of nuggets that I made into a bracelet for my fiancée. I had known them from their visits to the liquor establishments in Dawson City. They had moved their mining operation by walking the cat and backhoe more than 50 miles from Bonanza Creek, up Hunker Creek, over the summit, and into the Stewart River watershed. They mentioned passing some mastodon heads that still had tusks.

When miners discovered these skeletons preserved in the permafrost, they would drag them away with horses so their claims wouldn't be shut down for archaeological digs, allowing them to continue working. In the early days, miners thawed the ground with steam, using huge boilers transported up the creeks by horse. They had crews cutting down every tree and brush to feed these boilers. Later, they realized they could thaw the ground by pumping cold water into it. Most of the land was nearly denuded before they discovered this method. Sixty years later, the trees had grown back profusely, making it difficult to move through the dense forest.

I later went and recovered two of the mastodon tusks—one was about eight feet long, and the other just over three feet. I tied the large one to a pack board and dragged the shorter one over the summit, following the cat and backhoe trail. It took me three days of struggle to reach the end of the road up Hunker Creek, where I had parked my police car.

When I joined the RCMP, there was a rule that you couldn’t get married until you had nine years of service. This changed to five years, then to three, and eventually, the rule was dropped as they struggled to recruit new members. When I requested permission to marry, the new rule required $5,000 in the bank. At that time, I didn’t even have a bank account, let alone any savings, so I began selling everything I had collected, including the mastodon tusks and gold jewelry I had made. With help from my close friend, the manager of the Bank of Commerce, I was able to produce the required amount to get marriage approval.

We continued upriver, traveling nearly another hundred miles to the bridge on the road between Whitehorse and Dawson City. We had lunch at the gas station and lodge and phoned the detachment to let them know we were alive and well and would be heading back downriver. We anticipated making a much better time with the current in our favor.