I spent most of the fall and winter of 1964 in training, and in the spring of 1965, I was posted to be in charge of the Carcross Detachment. There was a Corporal and his family, as well as two other Constables. We took turns doing the night shift and, during the day, patrolled the area and dealt with complaints as they came in. On night shifts, you checked the four liquor outlets, patrolled the town site, and made sure the drunks made their way home, ensuring that by 1:00 a.m., all was quiet. We had a jeweler who was nocturnal and worked making jewelry most of the night. I would drop in to visit and end up learning how to fashion gold nugget jewelry and weld it with gold. I designed a tie-tack with a dog sled in action, and he sent the drawing out to Vancouver to have it made so we could solder the gold plate onto the spring-loaded tie-tack. I had a set of nuggets given to me by miners that I befriended, which I soldered into a necklace as a wedding gift for my fiancée. I would do a tour of the settlement and then go back to helping the jeweler with gold nugget jewelry that he would sell during the summer tourist season. I made my “sluice box” wedding ring for myself and designed our wedding ring, engagement, and friendship ring that wrapped together. He sent the plans out to have them made up in Vancouver.



He had a great numberof gold nuggets with a lot of quartz embedded, which he paid the miners the going price of $35.00 an ounce, as they preferred selling to him instead of paying the processing fee when turning their gold into the bank. These made great tie tacks, cuff links, and jewelry pieces with the added sparkle of the quartz. Working with the Mining Recorder, he ordered a 500-foot tape. The area of the world-famous Klondike goldfields is located in an unglaciated part of the west-central Yukon Territory. They extend from the Klondike River south to the Indian River and from the Yukon River east to Flat Creek, covering an area of approximately two thousand square kilometers. There are rugged service roads and trails extending over most of the area. They used to thaw the permafrost using steam, with huge boilers that they kept making steam with by feeding the boilers all the trees and shrubs until some creeks were totally denuded. Then, they discovered that they could thaw the ground by pumping water into it. The Yukon Consolidated Gold Corporation (Y.C.G.C.) built huge gold dredges that floated in the pond they dug on the Klondike River and Bonanza Creek. They were powered by electricity and had an endless bucket chain that brought the gold-bearing gravel up to a rotating screen that separated the larger gravel out, which went out the back on an endless conveyor belt and was dumped on the tailing piles.

On each side, there was a big pointed spike that went down to bedrock, and cables pulled it back and forth as the bucket chain dug up the layers of gravel. When that side was cleaned down to bedrock, and they could not turn further with the cable sets, they lifted the right spike, put the left spike down in the gravel, and continued to dig the gold-bearing gravel in the radius of the left spike into the dredge. When those two sweeps were complete, the cables were reset forward, and the dredge went forward in the pond that it had just dug. They let one side of the spike down and continued up the river or creek. The finer gravel and gold went over riffles, and the gold settled on the riffles while the gravel went onto the belt conveyor and out the back end. They would do a cleanup of the riffles regularly, and the gold nuggets and fine gold were conveyed to their processing plant, where it was heated and poured into gold bars weighing about 85 pounds each.

Around that time, there was a major gold theft from the mine in FlinFlon, Manitoba, and the security of the gold shipments was given high priority. The culprit made his getaway in his private plane but forgot to put sufficient gas in the plane to make it south to the U.S. border. He had to put the aircraft down in some farmer’s field in southern Manitoba. It was close to an RCMP detachment that observed the aircraft making an unscheduled landing and attended the scene, only to see the pilot hastily leaving the downed aircraft upon their arrival. He was arrested, and the gold shipment was recovered. As there were no security companies available in the Yukon, I was sent to the Y.C.G.C. gold room at Bear Creek, loaded some 285 pounds of gold bars in the trunk of the police car, and conveyed it to the Bank of Montreal or the Canadian Imperial Bank, where it was weighed. Then I moved the shipment to the post office, and when there was a scheduled plane arriving, I took the shipment in the trunk of the police car to the airport and accompanied it from Dawson City to Whitehorse. Another member took over security from there.

I was investigating a stolen car complaint and found thata vehicle did not navigate a turn in the road and went out into the tailing pond, which was 60 feet deep. I used my SCUBA gear and recovered the bodies of four of our locals. I climbed the steep shoulder of the tailing piles, and from the top, I took pictures of the pond and roadway. When I was about to begin going back down in the track of my last step, I discovered a gold and crystal nugget that was over an inch long and an inch across. It was evidently too big to go through the screen and went on up the belt to the tailing piles. I climbed a lot of tailing piles up and down the Klondike River and up Bonanza Creek in my spare time and never found another nugget.

Gold was pegged at $35.00 an ounce at that time. There were four leather satchels filled with gold bars with a total weight of 285 pounds. It never occurred to me at the time what the value of the gold was. Presently, in Canada today, it is $3,180.00 per ounce and is available in 24, 22, 18, and 14-karat gold per gram, ounce, tola, and kilogram.

In going around the creeks checking on the miners, we assisted the Mining Recorder by re-measuring the claim posts. This kept the miners more honest when the word went out that the RCMP wasmeasuring the position of the claim posts. The Mining Recorder mentioned that one of the claims was coming open, and I applied for Claim #4 below the discovery claim on Bonanza Creek. It had been worked out, and the only pay was high on the top of the embankment where the road was located. I dug through the overburden, and the pay dirt was only a few inches thick and consisted of really fine nuggets. This meant that I could take visitors and friends up there, and they could fill a five-gallon bucket of pay dirt, haul it down to the creek bottom about two hundred yards away, and learn to pan out the gold. It was only a few miles out of Dawson City, and the novelty of hauling the pay dirt down to the water source soon wore off for even the most enthusiastic gold seekers. You had to do $600.00 a year of improvements or pay the government that amount to keep the claim current. 

I was fortunate that the road went past my claim, and the grader operator enlarged my parking lot and removed some of the overburden of the pay dirt. I made sure he got a bottle of whiskey to keep the dust out of his throat. I managed to keep his throat clear for four years, and then I got transferred to the Northwest Territories after serving a year at Watson Lake, and the claim lapsed. I have a vial with five and a half ounces of small gold nuggets that I managed to keep for myself, and everyone who managed to get some left in the pan was able to keep their gold. I would always rework the sand where they panned for their gold, as there is a real knack to panning that comes with a lot of patience and practice, and I did not have to haul that pay dirt down the four hundred feet to get to the water.

In the winter, we went around the creeks and checked on the miners who stayed to work their claims. In the winter of 1964/65, it went down to minus 50 degrees on the 15th of November, and the temperature did not come above minus 50 until the 17th of March. There were weeks when it was -64. Two of the miners I found frozen, and one was rather difficult to get out of his cabin. It had a small door, and he had been lying on his bunk when he died, with one leg bent down to the floor and both arms over the side and down towards the floor. He was frozen stiff and was a fairly husky man to boot. Getting him out of the doorway, which was not that high, proved to be a big job. I was by myself and fifty miles away from help. The last I heard of that individual was that the undertaker was fighting with the Welfare Department because he wanted them to pay for warming up his facility to thaw him out to fit into a casket.

Our police car, which I mostly drove, was a Chevrolet station wagon. I insulated the motor, and it was never turned off except to change the oil. When you went up the creeks, you mostly drove on the frozen creeks as the roads were not plowed in the winter. I had all four tires with chains on, as the chains helped in steering on the front. I was going up Hunker Creek to check on an old Scotsman who stayed to work his claim. I had no idea how far I had come up the creek and was having difficulty where there was quite a rise at a rapids. I made quite a number of attempts and backed down further and further to get a longer run at the riffle. Just as I got up the grade, his cabin was on an outside bend of the creek. I went to the door and noticed that there was not much smoke coming out of the chimney. I pushed the door open and found him still lying sleeping on his bunk. When he woke up, he said that he had thought he had died and gone to heaven. He had used up all of his winter’s wood and put the last stick in the stove. He said he went to sleep, and when he half woke up seeing the lights on the frozen creek, he thought he had already died and gone to heaven, and he obviously went back to sleep. His brother had fallen down the shaft of their claim and died earlier in the fall. I had attended to that sudden death when one of the steps had come un-nailed, and he had fallen backward down some twenty feet of the shaft onto the bedrock. They had been shift-working, loosening the pay dirt and bringing it to the surface to pan out the gold when the water started to run in the spring. He did not discover his brother until he realized that he had not come to the cabin for supper. When he found him, he was frozen in the -20 degree of permafrost atthe bottom of the shaft. We had a heck of a time getting him out of the shaft on the windlass as he was frozen with his arms and legs at different angles.

He decided that he was going to give up working on his claim, and we loaded up everything he owned. He had run all of his pay dirt through a “Rocker System” in his cabin, as it had been too cold to cut any more wood to thaw any pay dirt. He said it had been minus 70 for over two weeks. I drove him back to the seniorcentrein Dawson City. He had two baking powder cans full of gold nuggets. I bought a small set of his weights, a handheld set of scales, and one of his “Carbide Lamps.” The carbide lamps worked by dripping water on the calcium carbide (CaC2) with water (H2O). This reaction produces acetylene gas (C2H2), which burns a clean white flame and produces very little carbon dioxide, so it can be used safely in confined spaces with a bright white light. About two weeks later, I was visiting the senior’s lodge, and he made a big deal and speech about me saving his life from freezing to death and presented me with his set of gold scales in a glass and wooden case. I guess that with each attempt to drive up the ice-covered rapids, the headlights would cross his cabin and light up the cabin’s frost-encrusted window and then go out for a period of time as I backed down the creek to make a longer run up the rapids.

I used to go over to the miner’s lodge regularly and take along a mickey of rum and a few bottles of coke until the matron caught on to all the merriment and forbade me from treating the old guys. It was very interesting to listen to their involvement in mining, and they mined on almost every one of the different creeks in the area. Each one kept the storyline very close to the truth as if they embellished the amount of money they made, where they were on the creek, and how many people they had working for them;the others would keep them in check as they were in the habit of correcting one another. I told the nurses at the hospital (where I bought one meal a day) about what had happened. All three of them were from England and had relatives who had made it to the Klondike. That interest had brought them to Canada and led them to volunteer to work in Dawson City. 

All three of them were taking notes with the idea of writing books when they returned to England, and they had never thought of visiting the old miners. The nurses’ handbags were never questioned, and I always checked in with the matron to show that I had taken her direction. Sometimes, we spent hours listening to what the miners related and reliving the good times on the creeks. Most of them told their stories of how they got there. Three of them had arrived in 1899 and were in their late 80s. They had come up the Chilkoot Pass after arriving at Skagway, built a boat near Lake Bennett, and came down the Yukon River. A couple of them had made millions and had spent it all hiring crews of workers looking for the “mother lode” and never struck it rich again. All three of the nurses were making notes with the idea of writing books. One of them got married here in Canada, and I lost track of the other two. Every time we went there, I had my heaven-bound miner relate the details of mysaving him from a trip to heaven. I still have his gold scales gracing the mantel on my fireplace, his “blow pan” and magnet to separate the “magnetite” that has very similar specific gravity to gold, some of his weights, and handheld scales.

I befriended the Manager of the Forestry and Fish and Game Department at Dawson City, and with his four-wheel-drive pickup truck, we traveled up most of the creeks in the entire Klondike area, visiting some of the active miners and measuring claims that were operational. What would happen is on some creeks, where every 500 feet, there was a claim and usually a cabin. Some of the creeks had only one cabin left, as the other cabins went into the fire of the last operational claim as it was cut and dried wood.

You would go into the cabin, and the plate, cup, and saucer would be turned upside down on the table by the window. The last active calendar was an indication of when it was last occupied, with the days crossed off. The lamp would have the shade alongside it, with a small box of matches underneath the cup so the mice could not accidentally light the cabin on fire. There was always kindling in the tin stove with “fuss sticks” whittled underneath the kindling and a pile of wood by the door. There would be a lantern, or some had a lamp with the shade alongside, and dried-up rings on the kerosene marking the winters since it was occupied. Depending on how big the cabin was, the bed would be opposite the single window or the larger cabins would have a double bunk in the back end, indicating that two people worked the claim.

One of the claims we visited had an old Italian who had a few good years and had gone back to Italy for the winter. He had a custom-built shotgun made for himself that was covered with silver filigree and his name set out in silver. He fell while hunting, and the barrel went into the snow. When he fired it next, the front of the barrel bulged, and he was afraid to fire it again, so I bought it from him as a souvenir. I also bought the .405 Winchester from him as well. He was quite a small man, and he had shortened the stock to fit himself, so when you fired it, not only did it kick like a mule, but it jumped up into your cheek. It came with two boxes of shells, and people have paid me to fire this big caliber rifle.

His story about the rifle was that he was crawling up a very steep hill on all fours, with his pack on his back, when he crawled into the belly of a big grizzly. The bear swiped the pack and knocked him, rolling down the hill. He returned directly to Dawson City and ordered the biggest caliber rifle that Winchester made. Teddy Roosevelt had the same caliber rifle when he went to Africa and was shooting elephants and rhinoceroses. I used it to dispatch wounded grizzlies right in Dawson City. When the Natives got drunk and did not attend the smoking fires under their salmon, they had to dry the fish rotted, and every grizzly that got a whiff of the rotted salmon headed for Dawson. They would try shooting the bears with their .30-30 rifles, wound them, and then call the Police to dispatch them. In one summer, I had to deal with six different grizzlies and five black bears that came into the settlement. For those not familiar with that caliber, the case is almost three inches long and about as big as your middle finger, with a round 500-grain slug. As the saying goes, “It kills both ends.”