I got a call from Whitehorse that I was to go near the top of the Chilkoot Pass and see if I could intercept and catch the two men who were bringing in dozens of illegal two-way radios. They had information that an American was transporting the radios up the Chilkoot Pass, and the chap from Whitehorse was going by railroad to Bennett Station and then walking the path to near the top of the Chilkoot Pass, locating the packsack of radios that had a locator beacon. He was then going to return to Whitehorse and sell them. They were poorly made and their use was disrupting the frequencies of the legal two-way radios in the area. The Alaska State Police had advised that they had information that the supplier had just purchased a large camouflaged packsack and would more than likely be involved in the delivery of the radios and would be going up the Seela Pass as the WPYR railway was shut down for a week or more for track repairs. I was to go immediately to see if I could intercept and arrest the people involved. I packed up some food, a tent, and camping gear and headed south on Lake Bennett with my detachment boat, then walked from the end of Lake Bennett to Fraser, which is where the RNWMP had set up in 1898 to check the Klondike Stampeders' supplies to ensure they had enough food for two years. I met with a number of hikers on the trail, some of whom were three generations of the same family.

I set up my two-man tent on a promontory overlooking the trail, almost half a mile back. My tent was a two-man, double-walled Arabian silk tent that only weighed nine pounds, so it was ideal for packing. I had binoculars and a spotting scope. In the first two days, there were a number of hikers going in both directions, and none of them had a camouflaged pack sack; they mostly appeared to be ill-prepared tourists. At the end of the third day, I was running out of food and decided that I would have to go down to Skagway. I went to the WPYR railway office and arranged to meet a member of the Alaska State Police. He happened to be one of the members I competed with in Anchorage at the Annual Pistol Competition between the RCMP and the Alaska State Police, and he had passed on the information to the members in Whitehorse. He was going to check the bars and the suspect’s residence to see if he was still in town. He phoned back about five minutes later to say that the suspect was in the bar two doors up from their office, so it was a good time to come to Skagway and get my groceries. He said that he had a red plaid jacket on. I hurried across the trail and down the Seela Pass and met him in his own jeep. He drove me over from Dyea to Skagway. 

I had a set of coveralls over my uniform shirt and pants, went to the bar, and had a drink and a good dinner.The suspect was playing cards with three other locals and had long curly hair, so he was very easy to spot. I bought some groceries, and he drove me back to Dyea. There is a gold seekers’ cemetery at Dyea where 37 gold seekers were killed by a snow slide when the Klondike gold seekers were lined up packing their 1,500 pounds of supplies up the 45-degree slope of the Seela Pass. It is surrounded by huge coastal spruce trees and is the most peaceful place that I have ever experienced.

I climbed back up the Seela Pass, which is easily a 45-degree angle, and had a good sleep when I got to my tent. Two days later, I spotted our curly-haired hiker walk off the trail to an area where the basalt face had deep cracks and place the pack sack in one of those deep cracks. It was obvious he was pacing the distance back to the trail, where he tied a big piece of yellow seismic tape onto the signpost that was pointing to Fraser (where the RCMP used to weigh the food of the gold seekers).

He immediately headed down the trail, and I followed him. We had arranged that the Alaska State Police would follow him out of Skagway, and if he dropped off the two-way radios, they would arrest him for the illegal importation and wait for him to come back down the Chilkoot Pass. He stopped to rest, and while he was resting, I talked to some other tourists who were on their way up. I told them that the WPYR Railway was not going to be running for another week due to some track repairs, so they would not be able to get a ride to Whitehorse or back to Skagway. I said if they camped at Bennett for a day, I would be able to give them a ride to Carcross and come back this way as soon as I had to deal with a bit of business further down the Pass. He rested for about 20 minutes and continued down the Pass with two more very brief stops. 

The Alaska State Policemen came out of the brush on either side, and he ran between them. One of them overtook him and tackled him, and he suffered a little road rash. He was surprised when I turned down my coveralls and displayed my uniform shirt. I told him that the radios he delivered last time had very poor frequency crystals and disrupted everyone else’s radios in the Whitehorse area. I said I would send them pictures and details of all the radios that were at the top so they could use the pictures for evidence, and I headed back up the Pass.

The seismic tape was still attached to the sign. I packed up my tent and camp and sat watching the area where he had stashed his packsack. Two hours later, our culprit showed up, and he paced the distance west from the sign after removing the tape came back to the trail, and headed towards Bennett. I followed him about 500 yards behind, and when he stopped to rest, I stopped as well. I allowed him to carry the packsack right to his boat before I approached him and told him that he was under arrest for the illegal importation of radio equipment. I handcuffed him to the steering wheel of his boat, relieved him of his gas tank, and shoved his boat out into the current of the river.

I went around to where my freighter canoe was parked and made contact with the man, his wife, and their two boys, getting them into the canoe. I tied a rope to the front of the other boat and had a pleasant trip back to Carcross. The man, his wife, and their two boys phoned friends in Whitehorse to come down to Carcross and pick them up at the detachment. I phoned Whitehorse, and the members came down to pick up their prisoner, who was hugging my flagpole. I made supper for the family and served my prisoner a fish sandwich and a cup of coffee. I laid out the 50 two-way radios, recorded all the serial numbers, and took pictures for the Alaska State Police. I turned the rolls of film over to the members to be processed at the Identification Section in Whitehorse. I understand he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to six months in jail. The American got a $10,000 fine, and since he was able to pay the fine, he must have been making a lot of money selling two-way radios.