It seemed that at every detachment I was posted to in the North, whether temporary or permanent, I was detailed to handle the "Indian Affairs and Northern Development" (IAND) file. Today, it has received a name change to Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development. There were no Indian agents, as there were no Reserves in the Yukon or the Northwest Territories, so the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) handled all of the requests from the local Indigenous peoples and passed them along to the IAND department personnel in Ottawa. The RCMP also managed the distribution of food, nets, ammunition, and medical welfare.

In Dawson City, they had a local bylaw that prevented the local Indigenous people from staying within the Dawson City area after 9:00 p.m., or they would be arrested and held in the RCMP Detachment cells for 24 hours. When Jean Chrétien became the Minister of IAND under Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau’s Liberal government, the bylaw was rescinded, and the Indigenous people were no longer required to trek back to their settlement of Moosehide, about six miles northeast along the Yukon River. Many had comfortable cabins in Moosehide where they dried fish and used fish wheels, though some had permanently moved into Dawson City, living in makeshift accommodations dug into the hills or in tents.

I visited the settlement in Moosehide and found that cabins that had not been occupied for a short period ended up with their wood stoves being used by others, as people did not want to cut and haul trees into the settlement for heating. I identified this problem withIAND in Ottawa, and they asked me for a solution. A developer had proposed a project to build and rent original cabins for the tourist industry. The town had serviced six lots with water and sewer, and the developer had poured the cement basements. However, the developer ran out of money and left town without a forwarding address, leaving the lots abandoned. I got approval from the Town Council to have IAND take over the basement areas, and I sought funding to build six log cabins for some of the Indigenous people living in Dawson City.

Ottawa approved the use of the basement areas and provided a significant sum of money with the stipulation that mostly local Indigenous people be hired for the construction work. A local carpenter/contractor took on the project, and I arranged for local Indigenous workers to accompany him south of the airport along the Klondike River to cut and peel the logs for the buildings. A local trucker hauled them into the site. I kept track of the hours the workers logged and arranged for them to be paid each week, though much of their earnings went to the four liquor establishments in town.

Construction began with local Indigenous help. Since there wasn’t enough gypsum board (gyproc) available, we decided to use 3/8" plywood for the walls, which would be painted. The walls were insulated, and a 2" x 4" frame was installed to support the interior plywood. The kitchen included a sink and cupboards, with a living area centered around a "Box Stove" with a glass front. There were two bedrooms and a bathroom, with large windows in the living room and smaller windows in the kitchen and bedrooms. The kitchen and bathroom were located close together for plumbing convenience. The cabins were equipped with lighting and plenty of electrical outlets.

The roof was insulated and covered with red metal cladding to prevent fires from sparks. The ceiling was also insulated, and plywood sheeting was installed with ceiling lights. All the corner logs were trimmed off with a chainsaw as they were random lengths, and the blocks from the windows and doors were piled beside the steps of each cabin, intended as winter firewood. All that was left for the residents to do was cut the blocks to size and split them for the stove.

Three of the local Indigenous workers stayed on the project until completion and were chosen to house their families in the cabins. I also invited two elderly couples, both in their 90s, from Moosehide to move into the new cabins since they would need assistance during the winter to obtain food from the Dawson City store. For the remaining cabins, I placed the names of eligible residents in a hat, and the Mayor of Dawson City drew the names. The Chief’s name was drawn first, and I ensured the process was fair and transparent.

I took many photographs of the construction process, from the initial log cutting to the final completion of the cabins, with smoke rising from all the chimneys. I sent these photos, along with a report on the former living conditions of the residents, to IAND.

I issued welfare checks to many of the residents during the winter. However, the Chief insisted I deliver the checks to them directly rather than arranging for payments to be made at the stores. During routine patrols of the bars, I noticed that only one establishment had a large Indigenous clientele after welfare checks were issued. Suspicious of the situation, I arranged for the checks to be delivered directly to the stores, ensuring that the correct amount of money would be spent on groceries. I discovered that the owner of the Westminster Hotel and Bar had been receiving groceries in exchange for drinks. I notified the store owner, who allowed me to mark hundreds of items with my initials. After issuing the welfare checks, I obtained a search warrant and found 39 items in the hotel with my markings. The owner was charged, found guilty, and fined $500. He was also required to reimburse IAND for the value of the items.

Unfortunately, by spring, only two of the log cabins remained occupied. The others had suffered roof collapses from the snow load, as residents had burned the interior plywood, studs, and ceiling trusses for firewood. The kitchen cabinets, doors, and plywood were also burned. Only the two elderly couples were able to make use of the blocks of wood left outside their doors. I sent a final report to IAND, including photos of the damaged cabins, but received no reply. Similar issues were common in Reserves, where many homes were left unoccupied and in disrepair.

In Carcross, the Indigenous people lived in log cabins along the river opposite the settlement and crossed the railroad bridge to get into town. After one person fell from the bridge and drowned, I requested funding from IAND for a footpath and railing on the bridge. The project was approved, and after getting permission from the White Pass and Yukon Route railway in Skagway, the footpath was completed. The Yukon Transportation Department foreman used a Bobcat to create a comfortable roadway along the front of the cabins, and I arranged for IAND to cover the cost of fuel and the operator's wages.

In Watson Lake, I handled the IAND file for a band living at Upper Liard, about ten miles west of town. This group also had ties to Lower Post, British Columbia, about 35 miles south. Since the Lower Post group had a Reserve and an Indian Agent, I suggested that the agent could manage welfare checks for both Upper Liard and Lower Post. Ottawa accepted the idea, which angered the Indian Agent but made things more efficient.

When I was transferred to Fort McPherson, I again handled the IAND file. I coordinated hunting and fishing efforts for the senior citizens, who preferred traditional foods over store-bought goods. I arranged for hunters to gointo the mountains to hunt caribou to bring back one caribou for the seniors, but they were initially hesitant to share outside their immediate families. I accompanied them on several hunts, and one trip resulted in 26 caribou for the settlement. I knew the area well and directed them to a large herd on a mountain bench. With our skidoos, we managed to approach the herd undetected. Using my .264 Winchester Magnum rifle and scope, I shot my allotted six caribou, and we brought them back to the settlement.

We also set nets in the river to catch fish for the dogs, and once enough fish was stored, the surplus was distributed to the seniors. Late in the winter, I spotted three bull moose near the settlement. I took two elderly men, both in their 70s, in a three-board toboggan behind my skidoo. They crawled through the snow to get close to the moose, shooting them from about 50 feet away. The moose were gutted and transported back to the settlement, where the meat was distributed to the 600 residents. My first year’s budget was only $79,000, including the cost of nets, shells, and supplies for over 600 people.

We received a directive from Ottawa to dispatch the dogs and harnesses to trappers, hunters, and fishermen in the settlement, with some being sent to Aklavik. As a result, more fish went to human consumption. The RCMP was testing snow machines to replace dog teams in the North, and I was tasked with assessing which brand to purchase. I had been advocating for this change for six or seven years, and I was finally able to test two brands for suitability.



I had purchased my own double-track Skidoo when I was at Watson Lake and used it extensively, but I knew it was quite heavy. It required a lot of adjustments, with the double track needing almost double the maintenance, and you had to be fairly mechanically inclined to deal with repairs in the field.

They sent one Bombardier “Alpine” Skidoo that weighed about 250 pounds and an Evinrude that had reverse and electric start. The tracks had steel bars across them, and the Evinrude weighed nearly 500 pounds. If you got stuck in the snow or on a slight grade when backing up, the back end of the skis would dig into the snow and almost stand straight up, making it difficult to get the machine out and underway again. Most of the trails ran on the ice of the rivers and creeks, which usually had 15 to 20 feet of steep banks. The Evinrude often had to be winched up these slopes, but the Skidoo, being much lighter and more responsive, could get enough momentum to make it up most of the banks with ease.

When there were clear ice riffles with any slope, the steel cleats on the Evinrude’s tracks couldn’t pull the machine up, let alone tow the three-board toboggan I built, which carried fuel and camp gear. On the trail, to service the Evinrude engine, you needed a tent large enough to hold a stove and cover the machine, as we normally de-carbonized the engine while on patrol. The mixed fuel caused it to carbon up quickly. However, with the Bombardier Skidoo, you could simply disconnect the fuel line, throttle cable, and four mounting nuts, remove the drive belt, and carry the Rotax engine into the heated tent to work on it.

I was tasked with reporting on the functionality of the different snow machines for the RCMP as they were deciding which to purchase to replace the dog teams. It became a simple decision, as the features of the Ski-Doo made it the clear winner. On a ten-hour day with dogs, you might make thirty miles depending on snow and trail conditions, and then you'd have to cook a warm meal for the dogs before getting your own supper. You'd have to run a good portion of that mileage just to keep from freezing. With the snow machine, you could go 40 miles in the first hour, and with a windshield, you just had to layer up on clothing to stay warm. The Bombardier Skidoo gave off some heat from the engine and exhaust, but the Evinrude’s engine was completely shielded by fiberglass, so no heat reached the operator. The Evinrude also used double the fuel of the Ski-Doo due to its bigger engine and heavier weight, so it was easy for Ottawa headquarters to make the right decision on which machine to choose.

During the early summer, we welcomed Jean Chrétien, then Minister of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development, to Fort McPherson as part of his summer tour. At a town hall meeting, the chief complained that the RCMP wouldn’t give him any more shells. I straightened out the situation and explained to the gathering that I had issued the chief twice as many shells as anyone else, and he had fired them all off in a drunken stupor at Christmas, going from house to house drinking. I also explained that my budget to support the more than 600 people was only $72,000, thanks to all the land food I was able to bring into the settlement. Chrétien told the gathering that they wouldn’t have to worry about any more poor treatment from the RCMP, as he would have their own Indian Agent working in Fort McPherson by the first snowfall, the first for the Northwest Territories.

I had gathered all the native crafts that the whites had purchased and displayed them on a few tables in the Community Hall, with signs in English and French saying that these items were not for sale and had been purchased by members of the community. There were gauntlets, moccasins, mukluks, an embroidered shroud parka, and our daughter’s “baby belt,” with her full name and date of birth beaded on a moose hide band. I was in full red serge uniform standing behind the tables when I saw Mrs. Chrétien pick up the baby belt and put it in her handbag. I told her that the baby belt belonged to my daughter, it was not for sale, and I would appreciate it if she returned it to the table. She spoke to one of her aides in French, and I understood what she said as she walked away. She told him to “fix it up with him, and he can get another one made.”

I told the aide I wouldn’t allow her to commit theft and that she was obviously a kleptomaniac. If she didn’t return the belt before she left Fort McPherson, I would charge her with theft, and a warrant for her arrest would be waiting when she got back to Inuvik. He offered me $100, but I explained I had paid $200 for it, and the woman who did that quality of beadwork had passed away, so it couldn’t be replaced. I continued to follow Mrs. Chrétien to ensure she didn’t dispose of it and watched her board the DC-3 at the airstrip. As the aircraft taxied to the end of the airstrip to begin its takeoff run, the rear door opened, and the baby belt was thrown out into the mud. I recovered it after they took off.

About half an hour later, I was on the phone with the Officer Commanding Inuvik Subdivision, who wanted to know what I had done to offend Minister Chrétien. I explained the situation, mentioning that we had signs in both English and French and that I knew Mrs. Chrétien understood English as she had spoken to the native woman staffing the tables. I told him I believed she was a kleptomaniac. He assured me I had done everything right and properly and that he would handle Mr. Chrétien and try to smooth things over.

A month later, I got a call from one of my troop mates in Ottawa, who told me that Chrétien had been discussing my case with the Officer in Charge. My name and regimental number were well-known to Chrétien, and I was apparently not in his good books. I like to think that when I retired as a corporal 27 years later, I could credit Jean Chrétien and his meddling with the upper echelons of the RCMP for my lack of further promotion.

True to his word to the local Aboriginals, he found an Indian Agent in Île-à-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan, who wanted to move to Fort McPherson. The agent was married, with four kids of his own and five native foster kids, as well as a manservant. They required four houses to be barged in, set up, and attached to the Utilidor (which provides water and sewer from the power plant in a heated insulated box). He also needed an office, a secretary, a vehicle with a garage, and he planned to teach the locals how to manufacture and sell tents.

He measured the amount of canvas required to go across the floor of a tent, up the wall, over the roof, and down the other side and ordered a roll of heavy-duty canvas that was 28 feet long. I pointed out that the tents we had were sewn together with a double-stitch sewing machine, so he ordered two of those machines as well. He even arranged for an old sailmaker from St. John's, Newfoundland, to be flown in to instruct the locals on how to use the machines and make tents.

He didn’t consider that most people in the North already had tents, so there wasn’t much of a market for them. He then had his wife take over the job as postmistress, causing a local native woman to lose her job without a pension.

I began adding up the cost of all the buildings, the vehicle, the freight to get them delivered, the cost of getting them set up and serviced in the settlement, the canvas, the sewing machines, and the transportation and wages for the Newfoundlander. I estimated the total to be far in excess of three million dollars.

He hadn’t arranged a phone system for his office, and I received a call from the airline that had loaded the huge roll of canvas onto a DC-3. They were asking which company would handle offloading it when it arrived. They had flown it 500 miles after loading it with great difficulty and were ready to send it to Canada after getting all customs approvals and payments sorted out.

I asked the person on the phone if they knew where Fort McPherson was in the Northwest Territories, and he said the pilots would take care of that—he had no idea that it was over 3,000 miles away. When I told him there was no company to handle the offloading and that we only had a D-4-sized Caterpillar in the settlement, he said that would be enough to pull the canvas out of the aircraft and that the plane would arrive next week. He explained that the canvas roll was on an eight-inch pipe sticking out about four feet on each side, with holes for attaching chains. The canvas was wrapped in thick plastic and should slide out of the aircraft, which had large freight doors at the back. However, the wheeled trolley system they used to load it had been left behind by the manufacturer.

I relayed this information to our Indian Agent, who worried that they couldn’t leave the $35,000 roll of canvas on the sandbar. He asked how I could help get it up to the Community Hall and start tent-making. Aside from using the Caterpillar to pull the roll from the aircraft, it was clear he had no idea how to transport it from the sandbar to the settlement.

I didn’t want to see more taxpayer dollars wasted, so I started thinking of ways to get the massive canvas roll into the Community Hall. There were two old metal sleigh bunks that the army had abandoned after a post-WWII exercise across the North. They had left them, assuming they wouldn’t last the rest of the trip. I dug them out with the Cat and welded a pipe in the centre, with plenty of braces. I also added a rotating unit on top with a half-pipe to accommodate the eight-inch pipe from the canvas roll and chained them 42 feet apart, dragging them down to the edge of the sandbar.

I received several calls from the pilots, and I described the location and size of the sandbar, assuring them it had been used by several DC-3s and twin Beech 18s over the summer. The sandbar was hard-packed gravel and sand over a mile in length. I mentioned my blue-and-white aircraft parked on the east side. I also explained that we were 35 miles up the Peel River from the Mackenzie River delta and 78 miles southwest of Inuvik. I suggested they use the Inuvik beacon to guide them and told them they could refuel there, as it had a paved runway with all the necessary facilities and accommodations.

I organized a large number of people to help unload the roll of canvas. We attached a big rope to the aircraft’s tailwheel so the people could pull the tail sideways as the canvas was unloaded. The Indian Agent paid twenty people to help when the aircraft arrived.

The plane arrived on the scheduled date, making several circles around the sandbar and settlement, lowering each time until they spotted the windsocks I had mounted on both ends of the sandbar. They landed into the wind, using only part of the runway, and taxied up near the roadway leading to the settlement. The loadmaster was surprised by our sleigh bunk setup for handling the canvas roll. He had me position the D-4 Caterpillar far enough back to pull the roll straight out of the freight doors at a slight incline.

The helpers managed to get the rear sleigh bunks under the pipe at the end of the canvas roll, and I chained it to the post through the holes in the supporting pipe. They started the aircraft and moved it forward until the end of the pipe was clear of the freight doors. The rear sleigh bunks were positioned for support, and I used the Cat to lift the pipe onto the bunk. The aircraft then took off towards Inuvik.

The task of maneuvering the sleigh bunks with the roll was a matter of pulling it forward with the Cat while using ropes and chains to steer it around the corners and up the switchbacks. The Jeep helped direct the rear sleigh bunk up the steep turns, adjusting the chain lengths as needed.

When we finally reached the settlement, it took a few more turns to keep the rear bunks on the road. At the Community Centre, I positioned the roll in front of the ramp leading to the big doorway. I lifted the rear bunk with the Cat, so the roll would go straight into the building. After drilling a hole through the opposite wall, I passed a cable through and hooked it to the Cat's blade, pulling the roll of canvas into the building across sheets of plywood to protect the hardwood flooring. Once inside, we removed the chains and excess plywood, closed the freight door, and figured that my work with the Indian Agent was done.