With very few jobs for the Aboriginals, there was little to no wage-earning work within the settlement, and a number of minor offenses occurred that required court time and sentences to be meted out. The local Justice of the Peace (J.P.) decided that as punishment, offenders would have to deliver to the R.C.M.P. compound a quarter cord of wood for a first offense, half a cord for a second offense, or, for more serious infractions, a full cord.

It seemed easy enough to do, as most families had a dog team, and it was just a matter of cutting down trees in the immediate area of the settlement and hauling them into the police compound. I built storage areas to facilitate the four-foot-long bolts of trees, stacked four feet high and four feet wide. Once the wood was delivered, I would cut it into firewood lengths and split the pieces with the RCMP-lettered punch on both ends to prevent theft, then advise the local J.P. when the fine had been paid in full.

I would strike the RCMP marking by simply hitting the area with the back of the axe head, then cut it up and deliver it almost daily to the elderly in the settlement. We had eleven people in the settlement over 80 years of age, five over 90, and three ladies over 100. I had to deliver wood on a daily basis during the winter, as anything left outside would be stolen overnight.

I set a trap for the would-be wood thieves. I placed four extra pieces of firewood by the oldest lady’s door. I had taken shotgun shells, cut the cartridge so there were no pellets, drilled a hole in one end of the stick of wood, and inserted the cartridge, followed by a wooden plug. By morning, two of the cabins had a surprise blast that startled the thieves. After that, spare wood could be left outside untouched for days at a time.

There was a noticeable decrease in petty crime, likely due to the stigma of having to supply cordwood to the RCMP compound and cut the logs into the required four-foot lengths. The offenders never seemed to connect the fact that the wood was delivered to people outside their immediate families, which didn’t sit well with their social structure. It was a simple task to fell three 32-foot trees, tie a rope to their dog team and toboggan, and, in an hour’s work, pay off a quarter-cord fine.

When Jean Chrétien moved from the I.A.N.D. Ministry to becoming Justice Minister, the Liberals passed a bill that prisoners could no longer be made or allowed to work in prison. A few weeks later, we received a memo stating that our wood-cutting practice was to stop immediately, meaning prisoners no longer had to make license plates or mop the floors of their facilities. I imagine our local chief had a direct line to Chrétien’s office to get that memo through in such a short time.

I was troubled by how I would provide wood for the seniors the next winter. I made a deal with the chief’s brother: I would help him cut a supply of cordwood, buy the wood from him, and use my barge to haul it to the settlement. I would also pay him for delivering the wood to the 19 seniors’ residences. In early summer, we took the RCMP’s 26-foot freighter canoe to an old burn area upriver, about sixteen miles away, and camped. Over five days, we cut and piled about 15 cords of wood on a high bank. Both of us were completely black from cutting, hauling, and stacking the charred wood, so we returned to the settlement to get clean clothes and take a bath.

The very next day, we hauled the barge upriver. As we headed upstream, we encountered floating logs—cordwood sticks drifting in the river. We recovered what we could, but when we reached the area where we had piled our wood, we found that the locals had thrown all 15 cords into the river. They couldn’t stand to see anyone get ahead; everyone had to be dragged down to their level. It wasn’t going to be my concern anymore, as we now had this "wondrous" Indian Agent to look after all the settlement’s needs, and I turned the I.A.N.D. file over to him.