On the 16th of July, 1967, we received a report of a major accident at the “Nine Mile Hill,” about 90 miles south on the Alaska Highway. The reason it is called the Nine Mile Hill is that it truly is a hill that goes down the side of a valley for nine miles, then crosses a bridge and goes back up the other side of the valley on a more gentle climb out of the valley. It was reported from the Fireside Inn (Mile 543), which is located just south of the hill. They had a chap who got a ride with a semi-trailer with a flatbed full of bags of cement. Evidently, the trucker lost his brakes and, trying to shift down, lost a gear. The truck was in a runaway condition, and the driver told him to jump out of the truck, which he did when they were about 50 miles an hour. He received a lot of road rash and would need hospital treatment. Another tourist reported that he saw the truck and trailer leave the road at a bend just short of the bridge and go off into the bush. It was going at a terrific speed, and there was nothing to see after that other than the cloud of cement dust off in the bush. They came directly to the lodge and reported the accident.

I dispatched the ambulance from the fire hall in Watson Lake and phoned Fort Nelson, requesting that they dispatch a couple of big wreckers because our only big wrecker from Watson Lake was on a trip to Whitehorse with a big truck from an accident the day before. I headed out to investigate the accident.

Arriving at the accident scene, there were the usual gawkers gathered where the truck had left the road. I was directed down the path of destruction through spruce trees that had been sheared off, with cement dust everywhere. Some of the trees were about a foot in diameter, and the truck stopped just a few feet short of going into the river. The driver was dead and still behind the steering wheel. The cab was full of big and small branches, and he was killed by the heavy tree branches that had him pinned in the cab of the truck.

I took pictures of the truck and the broken path back to the road, then went about removing the dozens of branches that were stuck into the cab. I got him out of the truck and into a body bag and, with the help of a couple of men, got the body out of the bush and into the back seat of the police car. The ambulance stopped with the injured man, and he briefly told me how he was instructed to jump out of the truck. I advised him that I would visit him at the hospital in Watson Lake, or if they released him, he was to go to the detachment and give them a statement.

I drove back to Watson Lake, got a sandwich, and headed out to Whitehorse to take the body to the coroner’s office. Jantje was about due to have our baby, and I told her that I would not stay over in Whitehorse and would get back as quickly as I could. I drove from Watson Lake (mile 635) to Whitehorse (mile 918), and on my way back, the radio responded when I was at the lodge, fueling up at milepost 777. I was refueling when I was advised that we had a baby girl, later named Sherry Lee Dunn. That is why I started out knowing the exact date of the accident. One of the members, who was very familiar with alcoholic beverages, made the suggestion, “That it was very nice to have a little Sherry around the house,” and that sort of appealed to us both. I am not certain where Lee came from, but for 57 years, she has been a pleasure in our lives. She was suggesting that 7 was her lucky number; she was born in 1967 in the seventh month, and I found out that she had been born when I was at milepost 777 on the Alaska Highway.