I was on a routine patrol going west on the Alaska Highway, about ten miles east of the Hotel and Service station, which is at Mile 777, and I saw a Raven come out of the bush from the north side of the road and continue to fly just ahead of me, and the ravel was having difficulty with the big white object and staying in the air with the load. He was only able to fly about ten feet above the roadway.It had a big white thing in its beak, and I was curious to see what it was carrying.

I pulled up and almost overtook it and still could not make out what it was, so I braked to a stop and quickly got out of the car and discharged my sidearm in the air several times, and it dropped the object into the center of the roadway.I pulled forward and got out, and it was the major part of the back side of a human skull with very fresh meat on the lower area and some long hair.I took a picture of it on the roadway, and with traffic coming, I opened the trunk and put it into an exhibit bag.

I was about to drive on to Mille 777, and going to phone. The Watson Lake Detachment when the Sgt. called me on the police radio.It was unusual that we could get radio coverage more than 20 miles, but I was on the top of one of the higher hills near the watershed, and I was hearing him with radio loud and clear, and I was a good 140 miles away from the office.

He related that he had a very, very distraught lady in the office, and she had been picking raspberries at several borrow pits going all the way up to Mile 777 and had lunch there.

“Borrow Pits” are where the gravel that they used to build up, the grade of the road, and because most of the area was glaciated thousands of years ago, there was always a fine grave at some depth of the borrow pit. When they were building the Alaska Highway, they would find a great deal of gravel, and they would take that gravel, haul it out, and put it on the roadbed that they were building with big shovels, trucks, and big earthmovers pulled with D-8 Caterpillars.In some areas where there are no hills, these borrow pits are sometimes located a couple hundred yards apart.

She indicated that she continued to pull into any of the borrow pits that had easy access to pick more berries on the way back home. She had no idea how many stops she went into on the way back home and met people in some berry pickers. A number of them that the people were also berry pickers, and they were counting both sides of the road. She found a good patch of berries at the back edge of a big borrow pit.She had been there ten or fifteen minutes and had been in the berry bushes about ten minutes, and working her way into the middle of this good bush and stepped forward;when she looked down, there was a body that had no head.It was a big borrow pit, and she had made her way around the outside of the borrow pit;the car was over at the other side of the borrow pit, and she ran for the car and headed for Watson Lake as fast as she dared, and she came directly to the Detachment office.He suggested that I go to the Mile 777, and try and get the time she was at the restaurant.I asked if I could wait and not go to check at the restaurant because I had the better part of the missing part of the human skull, and I just finished putting it in an exhibit bag in the trunk of my car. I am sitting alongside the entrance to the borrow pit where the skull came from. I told him the skull was fresh with still some fresh blood on it.

He asked how I got it, and I related that I saw the Raven come out of a big borrow pit on the north side of the road, and it had dropped it in the middle of the road when I fired in the air, and I had just got back in the car from putting it in an exhibit bag in the trunk.He said two of the recruits had just arrived, and he would be sending them both out to guard the scene until the Identification Section arrived from Whitehorse. I was to guard the scene until the recruits arrived, and I was then to come back to Watson Lake and get some rest as it was going to be a long day tomorrow.

 I told him to have the recruits stop off in Watson Lake to get food for their supper and breakfast as I was not sure how far I was from the restaurant at Mile 777.

I finished talking on the radio and got out to examine the entrance to the borrow pit and two different tire tracks had dug up dirt coming out of the borrow pit and heading in the direction of Watson Lake.One was a car, and it drove over the larger tire track that possibly could be a pickup truck, so he could put out that we were looking for the suspect (s) in a pickup truck and possibly heading south.I got onto the radio, advised the Sgt. of my findings, and told him I would park where the lady had parked until I figured the recruits would be arriving and would then meet them on the road so they did not disturb the tire tracks at the entrance.

I followed the car tracks over to where she had parked, and it was obvious that she was in a hurry to leave because there was gravel dug up for fifty feet from where she had parked.I walked the circumference with my rifle at the ready and found where they had a campfire and tramped down grass where they had a six by eight-foot tent by the marks left in the grass and the stones where the fire had been were still warm.I did not disturb the raspberry bush, where the body was supposed to be, and waited a couple hours in the car, and then went out and parked on the Highway. 

 They arrived, and I briefed them on the location of the body and where to park to not disturb the area where the body was supposed to be located.I pointed out a big pile of dirt on the north side of the borrow pit;if the culprits returned for the body, it would give them some cover, and I gave them some of my bug spray as they were a bit of a nuisance most times in the Yukon.I drove up to Mille 777 to get an exact measurement of the scene from that point and briefed the owner that I was to meet the Member from our Whitehorse Identification Section here in the morning.I measured the distance to the borrow pit was 10.4 miles east of Mile 777.

The Alaska Highway, or Alcan Highway was built during the war when there was concern that Japan was going to be invading Alaska and the west coast. 

 Dawson Creek B.C. is at Mile Zero and was at the end of Steel, where troops and equipment landed to begin the construction of the highway to the military base at Fairbanks, Alaska (mile post-1420) 

 An interesting thing happened at Dawson Creek at the beginning of the construction: the military brought what they thought would be sufficient dynamite to be used to build the highway and piled it about half a mile off to the north of the airport in a line that was more than half a mile long. 

During the night, a terrific explosion occurred, and the entire stock of dynamite exploded.It is currently filled with water and In their seaplane base at the airport, parallel with the main runway and about ten feet deep and fifty feet wide.Mileposts were erected at every one of the bridges and summits as the highway passedover three mountain summits as well as the established towns en route. 

Fort St. John is at mile 42, Fort Nelson is at milepost 300, Liard River Hot Springs is at milepost 446,and Watson Lake is at milepost 635. Whitehorse is at milepost 918, and Haines Junction is at milepost 1016.Beaver Creek is at the border between the Yukon and Alaska, and the milepost was1271, and it terminates at Fairbanks, Alaska, at milepost-1420.Fuel stops,restaurants, and motels grew up to service the traffic, and they were given milepost designations as well.

I drove the 142 miles back to Watson Lake, got some sleep, drove the same mileage back to Mile Post 777, met with our Identification Section member, and went with him to the site of the body.When we arrived there, where our two recruits were standing back to back with their service revolvers drawn, standing on the big mound of overburden and gravel, all during the night, a band of wolves had howled from every direction to keep them awake and alert.At that latitude above the 60th parallel, you have the sun in the sky for the entire 24 hours, and the reason for the Yukon adopting “The land of the midnight sun.”

We stood back while the Ident member photographed the area and the body.From what I could see, the subject had been standing outside the front of the tent when he was shot in the front of his face with a very high-powered rifle, as there was blood and brain matter scattered around where the tent impression in the grass and weeds and none behind where the tent had been erected for some distance.The body had been carried over to the middle of the raspberry patch and dumped there, as there was a blood trail from the tent impression over to the body. 

No rifle cartridge was located anywhere in the area.We put the male subject in a body bag and into the back of the Identification Section station wagon, and he was going to convey it back to Whitehorse for the autopsy. We all went to the restaurant at Mile 777 for breakfast, and the recruits and I then drove back to Watson Lake, and the Ident member headed for Whitehorse with the body.The examination of the body and his wallet revealed his name, and he was known by the Alaska State Police and was one of the people they were seeking for the armed robbery.

The Sgt. had notified all of the Detachments up and down the Alaska Highway and requested roadblocks be established at all the points in an attempt to catch the culprit(s) before they got off the Alaska Highway,but they managed to make it back to their home, I believe South Dakota before they were arrested.I was not involved in that part of the investigation and a 57-year memory does not serve me that well when I had no personal reason to deal with those facts.

They were wanted by the Alaska State Police as well for an armed bank robbery at a bank in Anchorage.There were two brothers and a neighbor of theirs, and they got into an argument over the division of the money from the bank robbery and the older brother shot him and increased the percentages of their take.

They then hid the body, packed up, and headed out.When they were arrested, they had a .300 Weatherby magnum, so that was the rifle that blew their partner’s head off, as I had suggested, was responsible for the extent of the head injury.

Ironically, a lot of my good police work and things that saved my life were just bits of good fortune and timing that were on my side.I imagine the amount of searching that we would have had to do to search the endless number of borrow pits in just ten miles from the last known Highway mileage point for that body, in the hundreds of borrow pits.To be just traveling north, along the Highway, and have that Raven fly out of the borrow pit with a portion of the skull and fly along the roadway and drop it when I fired my service revolver instead of flying off into the trees with this unknown white object that was again a stroke of luck. 

To be at the right place, to have the radio communication work over that distance, was more than luck.It was a miracle as 20 miles was what we were normally used to havingworked in the Police car.We had single-sideband radios for long-distance networking but they had specially cut antennas set up to work bouncing the radio signal off the ionosphere.

That reminds me of when I was doing a search years later and had traveled several miles off, on the Arctic ice, searching for an overdue prospector/geologist.We went out of one river onto the arctic sea ice and had to go about ten miles out to avoid the huge broken ice chunks from the shore.Ice breakup when the tide came in and out, and we were going to go in, on the next river to the east, and search along the west side of theShaler mountains, which could have been visited by our missing prospector.It was time to do a radio check-in with Coppermine Detachment, we stopped and set out the antenna and began calling to report on what we planned.

We had a portable Single Side Band radio and had an antenna cut for the frequency.And worked out what I thought was my approximate longitude and latitude, set out the antenna on the ice, and called Coppermine, but I did not get any response on the radio.I tried Yellowknife and Inuvik and got no response.Then, asked if anyone was receiving this frequency, and I got a response asking for my 10-20 (location), and I gave him 69 degrees north and about 170 degrees west. And he said for me to stand.

In about five minutes, he came back, calling my radio designation, and I answered him, and the next thing he said,Are you shitting me and are out on the Arctic Ocean?”I confirmed that I believed I was about 10 miles from shore north of Victoria Island, in the Northwest Territories, and wanted to know what his 10-20 was, and he told me Victoria, B.C.We chatted for a bit, and then the signal broke up.I was able to contact Coppermine to advise that we were unable to find the overdue prospector and were intent on breaking camp and heading back to Holman Island tomorrow.

At this latitude, the sun goes below the horizon about the 10th of October and does not come above the horizon until about the 15thof January, so for about four months, you are dealing with sort of a twilight zone where the only time it is really dark,when it is heavy clouds and with the semi-light of the Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights) you can make your way around without the aid of a flashlight.The lights of the skidoo were a great help in identifying the trail ahead and any marks on the ground.

We saw quite a few herds of the white Perry Island caribou and a lot of rabbits, and my guide was able to shoot a white wolf on this trip because they are so unfamiliar with any habitation that they do not run away but sort of stand their ground until you are within a couple of hundred feet before taking any evasive action.The Muskoxen just formed their defensive circle with their calves in the center, and you went around them, and they did not move and made offensive grunting noises.

We unfortunately did not see any Polar bears on that trip, but we did see tracks around, where it had killed a couple of caribou in different parts of our search.

 

Pipeline Break-Up TheCanol Road



When I was stationed at Watson Lake, one of the trappers reported a leak in the pipeline up the Canol Road. This pipeline was built by the American Army to provide fuel in the event of a Japanese attack on Alaska and the Northern Pacific coastal area. It was completed, and fuel was being refined and shipped, even over the wishes of a rather reluctant Canadian Government, between 1942 and 1944. The crude oil from Norman Wells in the Northwest Territories was transported to Whitehorse in the Yukon Territory for refining. It was intended to provide fuel for the war, as they feared the Japanese after their landings on some of the islands down from the Alaska panhandle.

The crude oil from the Norman Wells oil fields had such a high octane rating that it would flow through the pipeline at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit, even though the six-inch pipeline was not buried but just welded together and left on the surface. All of the six-inch pipe went from Edmonton on the railroad to Hay River and then by barge from Hay River across Great Slave Lake to the Mackenzie River down to Norman Wells. The construction crew built the Canol Road to haul the pipe, starting at Norman Wells and going to Whitehorse, where they built a refinery that could produce 3,000 barrels per day to ensure a secure fuel supply for the anticipated war effort in the northwest.

After the Alaska Highway was built, and they were anticipating having to fight the Japanese in Alaska, they were preparing to supply fuel for the military effort. The pipeline was a fiasco, costing over five times its $24 million estimate and plagued by shoddy workmanship. Its deficiencies, exposed by a United States Senate committee chaired by Harry Truman, embarrassed the American military. When the pipeline was abandoned in March 1945 after only 13 months of operation, it left a festering scar across the Canadian Northwest, a "junkyard monument to military stupidity." They left all the pipelines in place when they shut down the refinery and sold the refinery.

I had a double-tracked Ski-Doo, and the sergeant sent me up to see how extensive the leak was. I took the trapper with me and hauled some of his supplies to his cabin in a valley just short of the leak. We had lunch and then went further along to where he indicated the leak was. There was a definite smell of petroleum chemicals in the air.

He was smoking at the time and threw down his butt. There was a big "Woof," and the snow started to burn all over the place around us. We made a quick about-face and made it to the top of the hill, stopped, and looked back. There was a black pall of smoke that was possibly 500 feet wide, and we were a good half mile away. We could feel the heat from the flames, and the black cloud of smoke went thousands of feet in the air.

We went back to his cabin, and after supper, we went back to the viewpoint. There was still black smoke and flames several hundred feet in the air. All the trees were just sticks along the burned-out area. You could still feel the heat from that black smoke incendiary, even though it was -20°F and we were a good half mile away.

I went back to Watson Lake and reported my findings. I returned about a week later and drove right down to where the leak was located. It was still burning, coming out of the pipe. The second break was right where he had thrown the cigarette down, and we had hastily retreated. The pipe was not buried, just lying on the top of the ground, but there were just flames, and no smoke was visible. The valley had to be a mile across, and the fuel had leaked out of the pipeline, obviously the lowest point in the valley as well as the crest of the valley.

I enjoyed reliving their adventures and experiences. It seemed that most of them had nicknames, and true names were not always known. I never stopped to figure out how many gallons of liquid a six-inch pipe would contain in a mile of pipe, but it sure created a lot of heat when it was burning and melted two feet of snow for half a mile in every direction. What was coming out of the pipe was a light brown liquid and must have been a petroleum product with a fairly high octane as the fumes caught fire from the trapper's discarded cigarette.

I found out later that the refinery was located in Whitehorse and this had been the feedstock for that refinery. The pipeline was a fiasco, costing over five times its $24 million estimate and plagued by shoddy workmanship. Its deficiencies, exposed by a United States Senate committee chaired by Harry Truman, embarrassed the American military. When the pipeline was abandoned in March 1945 after only 13 months of operation, it left a festering scar across the Canadian Northwest. The path for the pipeline was just a cat road, made as level as they could to be able to weld the 50-foot chunks of pipe together. There was no road grade made with a total distance of 407 miles (654 km) between Norman Wells and Whitehorse.

The Chilcoot Pass Trail

The Yukon Government put a pile of money into developing the Chilkoot Pass Trail even though most of it is in the Province of British Columbia,and it seems the American Government took it over because they were trying to handle it in Whitehorse. They even began to restrict the number of people being able to use it all year, and they have a fee, a pass system, and a fine if you are caught on their end without a pass.You have to check in with Customs and Immigration at Whitehorse or with the American Customs in Skagway if you are southbound.They had a band of prisoners who volunteered to work outside and worked at building bridges across some of the small creeks and leveling some of the trails, lived in tents, and enjoyed the outdoors.They had one guard that worked right along with the prisoners.I checked on them every six to ten days and transported the chaps that finished their time served back to Whitehorse and sometimes provided prisoners transportation to the work camp.

The Chilkoot Trail is only 3,245 feet above sea level, and Dyea and Skagway are at sea level.To get to the top of the initial climb, it is almost a 45-degree climb for 3miles, and they suggest you consider 3 to 5 days to complete the walk from Dyea to Lake Bennett.The climb from the steepest part ends about six miles along the trail, and this portion is barren rock and usually some snow patches, even in the early summer.Then, a gentle slope through alpine stretches with scrub trees, willows, and the number of narrow, deep lakes that the trail shoulders with gentle downward slopes until you reach the head of the trail around Lindeman Lake and back into spruce forests.

Lindeman Lake has a mile of a fairly fast bit of rock-strewn water with heavy white horse rapids that flow into the end of Bennett Lake. It is shallow with lots of big rocks and you cannot make it up with a canoe powered by an outboard motor.

When I was checking on the penal crew, they were working on building and improving the trail around the east side of Lindeman Lake, and I hiked that portion, the Chilkoot Pass Trail, many times in the summer of 1965.Before the trail was surveyed for summer access, another trail was made as there was a really dangerous area where the surface of the basalt had foot-wide cracks that were very randomly spaced, and the cracks were five or six feet deep.If you missed your footing placement or slipped, you could easily break a leg.I spent over a week up in that Alpine area near the border on another investigation, which is another story.

At the south end of Lindeman Lake was what they called the Lindeman City, and in that portion of the valley, where most of the trees were harvested to be whip-sawed into lumber to build all of the thousands of boats, barges, and rafts that the gold seekers made.

On the shore, back of the Northwest Mounted Police cabin, his huge church, partially erected from the scab lumber from the outside of the logs, was whipsawed into lumber. Our church builder would have to tie all of the slabs and haul them the length of the lake, let them go in the river to the end of Lindeman Lake, and catch them again at Bennet Lake, where he was building his church.

On May 29th, 1898,Eight hundred boats set out down at Bennett Lake, following the ice in the lake breakup and then past the Caribou Crossing, now named Carcross; past Windy Arm and into Taku Arm, down the Tagish River to Marsh Lake and finally into the Yukon River.

 They were the leading edge of a massive flotilla that would grow to over 7,000 boats holding 30,000 restless and hopeful stampeders.The North West Mounted Police assigned a number to each boat, carefully recording the names of the passengers to facilitate notification of next of kin.Such precautions were the result of authorities having no way to ensure proper identification of bodies retrieved after their boats had capsized.In the first days of the rush down the Yukon River, over 100 boats were torn to pieces in the White Horse Rapids, dragging at least ten to their deaths. Those who had survived with their lives lost most of their supplies and were trapped between the horrors of the Coast Mountain passes and the unknown world of the gold fields.

When the Yukon River began to thaw on late May 16, 1898. over 4,000 people were camped out along Lake Lindeman, and they broke camp and followed the ice down Bennet Lake past Carcross to the Taku Arm and then the Tagish River, across Marsh Lake to the beginning of Yukon River at this point, they had traveled some 275 km.From this point, they had to navigate the Hells Gate Canyon, followed by the "white horse rapids" right after the canyon.Then, about twenty miles of the Yukon River, then the length of Lake Lebarge, and back into the Yukon River system to the Klondike River at Dawson City.The distance from the Hells Gate Canyon to the Klondike River is some 533 km. It is no picnic down the Yukon as there are many rapids that are extremely dangerous;the five-finger rapids are only one of them;choosing the wrong channel was fraught with the fear of upset capsize or being swamped and possibly drowning.

The N.W, M.P had the Fraser Customs post about ten miles higher up (possibly 10 miles) from Lindeman City, and they too hauled the slabs up to heat their building by dogsled, as it is located in barren rock country, which is located in British Columbia at the American border.They collected customs and logged every gold seeker in and weighed their perishables and food to ensure they had at least 2000 pounds of food to sustain them for two winters, as there were no facilities ahead of them, where they could replenish any food stocks. To prevent mass starvation in the remote and inaccessible Yukon Territory, the Canadian government required every stamper to bring a year's supply of goods to customs.It is estimated they had walked 4,000 km carrying 50 - 70 pound loads and returning empty for the remainder of their supplies, and at this point, they were only halfway across the Chilkoot Trail to Bennett.Most of the gold seekers took three months to haul everything they owned from Dyea to Lake Bennett.

I found a list of goods suggested by The Northern Pacific Railroad Company published in the Chicago Record's Book for Gold Seekers in 1897 and included the following list of supplies.

150 lbs. bacon		8 lbs. baking powder

2 lbs. soda			125 lbs. beans

1/2 lb. evaporated vinegar		10 lbs. tea

12 oz. compressed soup		10 lbs. coffee

1 can mustard		25 lbs. sugar 		

1 tin matches (for four men)	25 lbs. dried potatoes

Stove for four men	2 lbs. dried onions

Gold pan for every		400 lbs. flour

Set of granite buckets 		25 lbs. rolled oats	

Large bucket			1 lb. pepper	

Knife, fork, spoon, cup, and plate75 lbs. dried fruits

Frying pan15 lbs. salt 		Coffee and teapot

1/2 dozen heavy wool mittens	1 heavy rubber-lined coat

2 heavy over shirts1 dozen heavy wool socks

2 pairs heavy snag-proof rubber boots	2 pairs shoes 	

8 lbs. of pitch and 5 lbs. of oakum for four men,Nails, five lbs. each of 6,8,10 and 12 penny,four-man Tent, 10 x 12 feet for four men

8 lbs. of pitch and 5 lbs. of oakum for four men,Nails, five lbs. each of 6,8,10 and 12 penny, four-man Tent, 10 x 12 feet for four men 

4 pairs blankets (for two men)2 pairs overalls

1 suit of oil clothing		4 towels

Several changes in summer clothing

A small assortment of medicines

I believe I have it all correct, as I have completed the Chilkoot Trail three times. It seems I’ve read everything ever written about the Klondike, and I’ve experienced the places mentioned in most of the books and articles. I’ve even read letters sent home by those who lived through and experienced the hardships of that era. When I was stationed in Dawson City, I had the pleasure of meeting some of the original gold seekers who were living in the Dawson Senior’s Residence, as well as a few who were still working their claims on the creeks.

One of our duties was to periodically visit and check up on these miners. We had a record of who was on each of the many creeks and those who came into Dawson for the winter. A great number of them occupied the Senior’s Residence, and I often spent my free time listening to their tales and adventures, usually with a bit of rum to loosen the memories. I have a few good stories associated with some of those old miners that are certainly worth recalling.

There were three English nurses at the hospital in Dawson City, and they were always eager to listen to the stories told by the men in the senior residence. The head nurse, however, forbade me from bringing any alcohol into the residence. But the nurses’ kit bags were never checked, so they would sneak in bottles of beer. We would pour it very slowly into the miners’ big coffee cups and sit down to listen to their life stories.

The nurses would make notes and send letters back home to their families, sharing the miners' tales. Throughout most of the winter, depending on how many people were in the hospital and the nurses' shift schedules, we visited the Senior’s Residence a couple of times a week. Some of the miners had prepared notes with dates, names, and details of the events they had lived through. They would often correct each other on who was involved in certain happenings, making the stories more accurate with each telling. They enjoyed reliving their adventures and experiences, though most of them had nicknames, and true names were not always known.

Pentecostal Fishing Trip Up The West Arm Of Bennet Lake

I had a 35 HP Johnson outboard motor on my own boat that I had built when I was in St. John’s, andI trailered it completely across Canada and up to Dawson City and then down to Carcross.I tried the 35 HP on their26-foot freighter canoe,whichwas the Police boat.It went so fast on flat water that the canoe was right out of the water literally.I only tried it once and did about five rotations before I was able to shut down the throttle.The air got under the boat, and only part of the skeg and prop were in the water.I was really proud ofhow fast I was going as there was no water resistance on the hull of the boat, and obviously, the prop was taking bigger bites out of the water and became more efficient with the faster speed.I had to turn slightly with the slight wind drift on the side of the boat, and when I adjusted it slightly, the trust of the motor was going off the longitudinal mass of the boat, and we passed where the front of the boat had been.I was holding onto the seat and right close to the center of mass of the o/b motor in the rotations.Ihad several rescue missions and trips in really big waves with the two 18 hp engines on that freighter canoe because when there arereally high winds, the waves get higher, but the distance between the crests isfurther apart.So you would have both engines running, one in neutral and locked down and the other running for going alongside the shoulder of the waves, and if you went over the crest of the wave, then you put the second motor in reverse so that the prow of the canoe did not go into the wave ahead and take on water.

You could have one motor locked down (so it would not tilt when in reverse), and if you were going right downwind, you had the locked down motor in reverse and adjusting the throttle so it could slow you down enough, and you could reverse the locked down motor and prevent taking on a massive amount of water with the bow of the boat stuck in the wave ahead.With going across the wave pattern, you could get in the trough of the wave on the back side of the slope, and you were really out of the wind and adjust the throttles to steer the boat without changing the angle of the motors. The only water you took on was the spray from the crest of the wave.The nice thing about having the second motor is that you have an instant backup if one fails, and you have two tanks of fuel with you at all times.I have taken both the engines running up to about a little more than half throttle, and you are going fast enough with still some boat in the water. Those big freighter canoes have to be the safest watercraft because you can walk along the gunnel in safety, and it will haul a couple tons of supplies if you want to load it down.

I have a story to relate from a trip toBennett Lake.We had a Pentecostal Minister whowas doing his best to convertthe local Natives all about his religion.He was married, and they had just had an addition to the family a couple months prior, and the Grandparents came from Illinois to see their little offspring.The Minister asked if he could borrow my pleasure boat to take his parents down Bennett Lake and up the West Arm for a fishing trip and afternoon picnic.I agreed to loan him the boat because the lake was dead flat, and it was only about a 15-mile trip. 

 The fishing gear was in the boat, and I advised him where the big ones were mostly to hide where there was a stream coming from between two mountains, and it disappearedbefore it madethe lake and its underground steam that the big ones feed on the smaller fish working in the underground current.They loaded up some food and I watched them go down Bennett Lake towards the west arm of the lake.

About noon, it really started to blow with a vengeance. When I met the train that was pulling in from Skagway, the engineer reported that there was an oil slick on Bennett Lake up about the West Arm entrance.It was not the information that I wanted to hear.

I packed a tent, camping gear, rifle, and grub, as well as rain gear because I had no idea what I was to encounter or how long I would be involved in the search for my Pentecostal Minister and his family.Going straight into the wind was not a problem other than a pretty rough ride and getting wet from the spray off the top of the waves. And the crash of the boat in the next wave.I had to angle just slightly and went alongside the railroad side of the lake. Iencountered the oil slick as described by the train engineer and followed it only to find it was a barrel of diesel in the water at the side of the railroad tracks that had rusted out and leaking what was left in the barrel.

But I still had a mission to find my preacher buddy and his family and my boat.By this time, I was past Windy Arm, and I just turned out into the big waves and caught a trough and headed across Bennet Lake, and the waves took me right into the West Arm and a lot calmer water along the south shore of West Arm because of the high mountain range on along that side of the lakeI travelled all the way to the west end in relatively calm water.The West Arm of the lake (about 16 km long (10 mi), and Millshaven Bay, off the West Arm, bring Lake Bennett's total shoreline to about 160 km (100 miles).Coming back along the north shore was a bit choppy. Lo and behold, my boat was pulled up on shore with the engine off at my favorite fishing spot.

The family wasback in the trees and out of some of the wind and in the process of increasing their exposure to the wind with some sloped branches and some blankets over the branches to provide protection for the baby from the wind.It just started to rain, so I got the tent out of the boat, and we put it up and had the men help me haul the big canoe mostly out of the water stern first.We set up the tent, got the Coleman stove going, and made a pot of coffee as well as tea and a couple of infrared heaters, and they were very comfortable in a matter of fifteen minutes. Other than the roar of the wind in the trees above, it was a nice camping experience for them. I told them that I would not be able to take everyone safely in the freighter canoe and that my boat would not handle the waves and wind out in Bennett Lake, but I assured them when it blew this hard, it did not blow for long, and I would come back when the wind dropped and pick them up and help put my boat back in the water and hook it up again.I told them that I had to go back as I had advised Whitehorse that I was going out on this search and had to get back to tell them that everyone was alive and well, and I got paid to Police Carcross, no picnic in the West Arm of Bennett Lake.

Then began the discussion of their duties to bring the word of God to their devoted churchgoers, and they had to be there for the morning service.I agreed to take the preacher, and then he wanted to take his father to show him how well he conducted the service and brought the message to his parishioners.With their minds made up that they were coming with me, my concern turned to the protection of the two ladies and the baby left alone in the wilds of the Yukon.She indicated that she hunted with her brother back in Illinois, and it was squirrels,rabbits, racoons, and groundhogs, and she used a .22 rifle when she hunted with him.I asked if she had ever fired any rifle other than the .22 rifle, and she said she had shot a .410 shotgun once.

I was intent on leaving her my .264 Winchester Magnum for protection from grizzlies, black bears, and wolves that were common in that vicinity.I had done some work the week earlier with the Yukon Fish and Game member and flew a super cub in the mountains within 8 - 10 miles of their location, and we saw eleven grizzlies, some with cubs up at elevations hunting marmots.I decided to familiarize her with my rifleand how to load it and asked if she would like to try shooting it to gain confidence that she could use it if she needed to.There was a blown-down tree floating out about150 yards offshore, and I had her lean the gun over a log and try to hit right at the waterline near the roots hanging out of the water.She shot, and there was a huge spray of water where I had told her to aim, and she was distracted enough to have hit where she aimed that she was not aware of the recoil she had absorbed.

I left them with all of my food, and they had caught several fish, so they were well set up for food.We got the big canoe back in the water and thenlay directly in the bottom of the boattowards the bow of the boat and covered it with a tarp so they would not get too wet. They waved goodbye, and we headed for Bennett Lake and some big waves.There was an ever-increasing height of waves as we wentout into crossing the open area of Millshaven Bay, but we were able to ride the back of several troughs for a couple miles and soon hit Bennett Lake in all of its furry.We were in the calm atthe bottom of a trough, and they decided to see what was going on and threw back the side of the tarp and both of them looked out, and there was a wall of water, possibly 10 feet on each side, and I suppose it looked higher as they were laying in the bottom of the boat and the right top of the wave was a white froth from the wind. They pulled the tarp back over them, and I was taken up trying to adjust the motors to climb the back shoulder of the wave. 

Then,all of a sudden, I thought we were in real trouble because both engines started making this strange sound.When I slid down into the bottom of the trough this strange sound was the both of them praying at the top of what their vocal cords could produce.This strange sound continued until we pulled into the shelter of Caribou River and under the railroad Bridge right in Carcross.

Overnight, the storm blew itself out, and we returned in the morning after the church service and picked up my boat and the family.They came back together, and I went on to Bennet for Lunch and a check-in with prisoners doing trail enhancement leading to the Chilkoot Pass, and returned to Carcross to find that I had to drive to Tagish on a complaint.