In the early summer, I took the information from four Swiss Mountain climbers who had intended to climb several mountains in the area north and east of the Cantung Mine, more than 300 Miles from Watson Lake.They had made arrangements with the local taxi to take them and their equipment to the area and had an inflatable canoe, that they would navigate the Black River and stop off at the mountains. They thought it had never been climbed.Then, they would go down the Nahanni River to check in at Fort Simpson on the 25th of August.They had arrangements to fly to Yellowknife and then to Edmonton and back home from there to Switzerland.They had permits from the Yukon and the Northwest Territories government.I went with them to where they were camped, near the “Sign Post” park, and they intended to put up Swiss flags to show that they had climbed that mountain.They all had florescent orange jackets on with the Swiss flag sewn on the breast pocket, and I took some pictures with their cameras at the signposts area.

I had attended the Mountain Rescue course in Banff, and I was the coordinator for the Yukon and had been involved in three mountain climbing rescues on Mount Logan, as it is the tallest mountain in Canada at 19,551 feet high and It is in the St. Elias Range of mountains in the southwestern part of the Yukon.It is located only 75 miles off the Gulf of Alaska and there are no weather stations in the area, and it is subjected to extreme snowfalls of three feet of snow in 24 hours.All of those rescues were a matter of hiring a helicopter and locating the overdue climbers and then being dropped off, while the helicopter ferried them to a lower elevation, where there was no snow or out to their vehicles on the Alaska Highway.

They did not have any topographic maps, and they only had road maps of the Yukon and Northwest Territories, so their knowledge of the rivers wasvery limited.One of the group brothers had been working at the Cantung Mine, and when he was back home in Switzerland, he had shown them pictures of the mountains in that area, and he had climbed the first two mountains northeast of the Cantung Mine.I had flown over the route they were planning on taking, and I warned them about the Virginia Falls on the Nahanni River and told them of a Water Resources cabin, about half a mile up from the cable car set up on the river just below it, where the Water Resources personnel used to measure the 75-foot difference in the height of the water from spring to fall.I figured that the height of the water at this time of year would not bemuch of a concern, but I warned them that they would have to portage around Virginia Falls on the south side of the river, which is just upriver from cable car setup near the water resources cabin.

They spoke good English, and I thought that I had warned them sufficiently, although I did not have any pictures to show them of the size and volume of water that flowed over the falls.I indicated to them that the portage is almost two miles above the falls and on the south side of the river, and there is no access back into the river for six or seven miles on the north side of the river and encouraged them to sign in at the Water Resources cabin so that we would be able to know that they made it that far.

I have since learned that Virginia Falls has an average volume of 1,000 cubic meters per second (35,000 cubic feet). It is twice the height of Niagara Falls at 315 feet with a width of 850 feet, besides having secondary falls on the North side of the major falls. That is more restricted with basalt rock inhibiting the free drop that same height as the main falls.This was followed by several sharp twists and turns of a very narrow and at one place, where the river runs directly into a rock face that is at least 4,000 feet of vertical basalt rock in the next two to three miles of this canyon.

I had the file open, and the diary date came up on the 25th of August.I contacted Fort Simpson, and the Swiss climbers had not arrived.

They said their usual Night Guard had just returned from a holiday prospecting trip above the Virginia Falls, and he was west from the area of where the Black River dumps into the Nahanni, and he had not met anyone on the Nahanni River.

There is a smaller portion of the falls that cascades down a basalt rocky area, about a third the size of the actual falls, with a major pool at the base. We made plans that I would search the mountains east of the Black River, as they had planned to climb several mountains in that area. They could make their way up the Nahanni River to see if they could locate any sign of them on or near the river. They would have three days until I finished checking the mountain climbing area, after which we would begin a physical search of the river. In case they got into trouble during their mountain climbing, we would have the other end of the search covered.

I drove into the mine at Cantung, waded across the Black River, and climbed the third mountain on the east side. I located the Swiss flag and, with binoculars, I could make out the red flag with a white cross on the top of a mountain to the north, though clouds prevented me from seeing the top of the third mountain. I had my camp in a pack sack and hiked the ten miles, mostly on the gravel bars on the side of the river, as the main flow was further down. My topographic map indicated the best route was up a steep slope on the northeast side, which saved me from near-vertical faces on the river side of the mountain and another eight- or nine-mile hike. I reached the top and located the flag almost directly above the river. With the binoculars, I could see where their camp had left an impression and noticed some cut spruce trees in the area. Looking north, I spotted the fourth flag on the next mountain, so they had safely climbed their four mountains. From there, the Black River would have been a gentle paddle down to the Nahanni River.

I crossed the river and hiked onto a cat road that led between Cantung Mine and the second tungsten mine at Mantung, making good time walking the thirty-some miles back to my police car at Cantung. I had a good meal at their mess and drove the 300 miles back to Watson Lake. The sergeant suggested we charter an aircraft and fly into the Water Resources cabin on the Nahanni River to ensure they had made it that far. If so, they would be in the Fort Simpson detachment area because, more than likely, they hadn’t taken my advice and had tried to go over Victoria Falls in their canoe.

 

I went to the airport to check on the availability of an aircraft, and the owner said a new pilot was coming in on a flight from Vancouver with 3,000 hours of float time. He thought it would be a good trip for the new pilot since I knew the country and was a pilot myself, making it a good introduction to flying in the North. The aircraft was fueled, and the Canadian Pacific flight arrived. The new pilot was introduced to the aircraft, and I loaded my survival gear. I made a phone call to the detachment, and we headed for Cantung Mine, basically following the dust line on the road below. We turned north into the Black River valley and soon east when we reached the Nahanni River.

When I first saw the cable stretching across the river, I told him we could land as the cabin I wanted to check was on a hill in the trees, with a small indent in the river and a beach in front. He landed quickly, going downstream, which was a bit different from what I had learned when I got my float endorsement. There were no clear signs of wind direction. When he turned into the river current, which was easily nine knots, we were directly across from the cabin. Each time he tried to turn toward the cabin, the strong current would catch the side of the floats, sending us downstream. He had to power up and turn back to where the cabin was located. Each time he tried, the plane would swing completely around and head towards the falls and the cable that stretched across the river with a suspended case on the north bank. After the fourth attempt, I asked if he minded if I gave it a try, telling him I had my float endorsement and had landed on rivers before, though never in a current this strong. He agreed, so I took over, staying close to the riverbank where I knew there was enough water from the sloping basalt. I powered into the little bay, shut down the engine, and coasted gently onto the sandy beach.

I went up to the cabin and checked the book on the cabinet. All four had signed in, leaving their addresses and phone numbers in Switzerland, which I copied into my notebook. I returned to the aircraft and suggested the pilot sign the book as well. He did, and when he got back, we pushed the aircraft off the beach. He started the engine, and we continued upriver. From the cabin to the falls, the shore on both sides of the river was steep, angled basalt rock, making it impossible to exit the river. Four people in an inflatable canoe couldn't paddle against that current to return to the portage point on the south bank of the river. It was most likely they had gone over the falls and drowned, as there was no way they could have escaped the river given the slippery, angled rock sides.

We pulled into the current, and he conducted his engine checks before powering upriver without beginning a takeoff run. As we rounded the first bend, I grew concerned about his intentions. He then turned and applied full power, attempting a takeoff going downstream, which was a definite mistake. The floats are designed with a step—about a foot rise for the flattened rear—so that only half of the pontoons break the suction with the water at a certain speed, reducing the takeoff run. We were nearly on the step when the river’s turn approached, causing the floats to reenter the water. He continued to rock the plane back and forth, trying to regain the step, and we were nearing the cable crossing. Just as we approached the cabin again, the plane finally lifted off. However, we had no choice but to fly under the cables since the riverbanks rose 500 feet above us, with the north side formed by 6,000 feet of solid rock extending skyward, snow still on the peaks.

We flew under the cables on the left side of the river, then over the falls, losing altitude in the downdraft. I told him I was taking over as we were nearing the canyon. With no room to make turns or gain altitude, we were committed to navigating the narrow canyon. Each turn cost us precious distance from the boiling waters below. At one point, we were within 75 feet of the rock face. If the engine faltered, we would crash. My pilot, a Catholic, kept crossing himself and muttering prayers, and the smell in the cockpit made it clear his nerves had gotten the better of him.

We finally made it to a gentler stretch of the river and gained some altitude. During one of the steep turns, I caught a glimpse of a red canoe among the debris of broken trees on the south shore. After we reached altitude, I offered him control, but he refused, saying I had saved our lives so far and he had no idea what heading to take. He admitted he had had enough of northern flying. I asked where he got his float time, and he said most of it was between Vancouver Harbour and various harbours on Vancouver Island, with some trips to Prince Rupert and salmon fishing camps. He had never landed in a river, and dealing with currents like this was entirely new to him. He had taken on an eight- to ten-knot current without knowing how to handle it.

We landed back in Watson Lake and pulled up to the dock. The airline owner commented on how smoothly the landing had gone, and the pilot told him I had saved our lives. He then announced he was returning to Vancouver and was done with northern flying. I went to the detachment and spoke with the Fort Simpson members. I told them that the group had signed in at the cabin and that I had spotted the red canoe among the debris about two miles below the falls. I doubted it would be visible from the river, as the water level had dropped dramatically, and both shores were covered with broken trees. It would be challenging to find the bodies without walking both sides of the river due to the numerous bends and the amount of debris. They informed me they had already recovered one body on their way to the falls, identifiable by the Swiss flag sewn on the jacket and the personal ID found in his wallet. They were working on notifying the next of kin. I passed along the contact information from the cabin logbook, which included phone numbers and addresses.

The police plane was coming to pick up the body and transport it to Whitehorse for shipment back to Switzerland. They invited me to assist in searching for the remaining three individuals, with one person running the boat and two searching the riverbanks. I agreed and caught the police aircraft to help. I packed my tent and a few supplies, and by evening, I was standing on a sandbar on the Nahanni River, about ten miles below Virginia Falls, waiting for the Fort Simpson members to arrive.

The next day, we located the inflatable canoe and some gear, and we found a second body about a quarter-mile upstream. On the third day, we switched sides of the river. The man running the boat was jumping over logs on the other side when I found the third body half-buried in the sand alongside a large log. We decided to terminate the search, suspecting the fourth body had likely remained in the river or was now north in the Mackenzie River. Alternatively, it could have been buried in the sand along the 150 miles of Nahanni River between the falls and Fort Simpson, as the river had dropped 50 feet from its high water mark. We set up camp and waited for the police plane to return. We piled and inventoried their gear for recovery and shipped it back with the bodies, sending the inflatable canoe to the Swiss climbing group that had hired me to locate them. I had completed my work as an observer for the group, returning their inflatable boat, and I kept their thanks and acknowledgment that I had fulfilled my contract.