I was stationed at Fort McPherson, N.W.T from September 1st, 1967, for two years, and one of our duties was refurbish the grave sites and cairns of ex-members that died in our whole Detachment area.I had my own aircraft at the time, and I took one of the local natives whohad been involved in the search for the Mad Trapper.I flew the Rat River area, and he pointed out the location where Cst. Edgard Millen was shot by the Mad Trapper.It would appear thatMillen had figured out that the "mad trapper" had been walking with his snowshoes on backward and was tracking him. The mad trapper had made his way up a steep slope. 

 

 

At the side of the valley and was hiding at the edge, watching the confusion of trails that he had left.When Millen poked his head up over the bank, the mad trapper who washiding in the snow at the top and shot him dead.

There had been a crude assembly of short logs to mark the site.I came back home and carved and painted a sign that was four feet square.I went by riverboat up the Rat River and hauled in my sign and more paint into the site from the Rat River.I made a four-sided square of descending logs out of local six-inch spruce.I had peeled the bark off them,spiked them together, and painted them white.This cairn was about ten feet across at the base and seven feet high with diminishing lengths.I then nailed the sign that I had made that was facing south so it could be seen from the valley.I know I have a picture of the cairn in my endless number of albums.I have also visited the Park, which is named after him, and a monument in Edmonton next to where the Northlands race track used to be. 

While at Fort McPherson, a writer came over from Whitehorse, and he stayed at my residence while I located all of the locals whowere involved in the Mad Trapper incident.I arranged translators for some of them to sit in the interviews and take them to where they were at fish camps in the Mackenzie delta.He sent me a book that he wrote for my efforts.

I did the cairns on the "Lost Patrol" when five members froze to death.While at Fort McPherson.They were buried in Fort McPherson, but I built cairns where they had died.Sgt. Dempster had made the mail route from Dawson city in record time, and Inspector Fitzgerald decided he would beat his record and obviously took less dog food and less food for the five men.

Inspector Fitzgerald made it back to within about five miles of Fort McPherson before he died of the extreme cold. They got lost, and the temperature went to -70to -80 F, and they ran out of food and ate their dogs and harnesses, and slowly, each of them froze to death trying to make their way back to Fort McPherson.

I was at Dawson City in 1965, and myself and a serving prisoner, refurbished the entire graveyard. It was my first investigation of hit and run and impaired driving when I got to Dawson City in August 1964. The traveling Judge sentenced him to six months to be served at the RCMP Detachment in Dawson City.We had a night guard, and I entertained Henry during the day.I made all new headboards by routering out their names and date of death for the graves, painted them white with black lettering, hauled different coloured gravel, and put up a low chain-link fence with black metal posts around the entire cemetery, and I built a big overhead sign for the entrance complete with painted crest.

While stationed at Carcross, I refurbished and made new headboards for two members whodrowned at Tagish. They had been fishing for dog food, and the canoe upset and they got tangled in the net and drowned.I just got back to the office, and correspondence from Ottawa ordered that they be dug up and transferred to the great-looking cemetery in Dawson City.That was accomplished, and I am sure that prisoners dug the graves because we were down seven feet before we hit the caskets.I built small caskets to accommodate their remains, which were "Buffalo Expressed" to Dawson and buried there.

While at Coppermine in 1970, I refurbished the cairn and built a headboard for the member that was buried over at Tree River, about a 150-mile boat ride east of Coppermine (now Kugluktuk). 



 

 

RCMPVA Vancouver Division posted: "Constable Edgar Millen – Reg # 9669 - RCMP Honour Roll # 51 Recently I submitted an article to our Vancouver Division web site on the recollections of members involved in the attempted arrest and search for Albert Johnson, always to be known as “The Mad Trapper."



 

New post on RCMP Veterans’ Association - Vancouver Division	 

 

	The Mad Trapper Part IIby RCMPVA Vancouver Division


Constable Edgar Millen – Reg # 9669 - RCMP Honour Roll # 51

Recently, I submitted an article to our Vancouver Division web site on the recollections of members involved in the attempted arrest and search for Albert Johnson, always to be known as “The Mad Trapper of Rat River.” See:

http://www.rcmpveteransvancouver.com/the-mad-trapper-of-rat-river/.The attempted arrest of Johnson resulted in the death of RCMP member Edgar Millen.

I have always said it is amazing to me how telling the story of one member or event in the history of the Force connects you to other stories. Eighty-eight years after the death of Edgar Millen, as a result of the above article, I have been connected to one of Edgar Millen’s relatives.

My friend, retired Superintendent Al Bunn, (ret’d), Reg # 22180/O.1436, upon reading the article, contacted me and informed me that he had a friend who was a relative of Edgar Millen and is in possession of photographs of Millen. Al suggested it might be worthwhile to contact him, which I did. Dots begin to connect!

Keith Briggeman’s grandfather was Edgar Millen’s brother. Being the only male grandchild, he was tasked with the safekeeping of Edgar’s possessions.

Keith retired after 34 years with BP Canada Energy Company and heritage companies. His formal education is finance where he worked prior to becoming the Manager, Corporate Security for BP Canada as well as the Manager, Corporate Security for BP America mid-west assets. Although he was never in law enforcement, he spent a great deal of time working with Calgary Police, Edmonton Police, and R.C.M.P., mostly out of “K” Division as well as various State Police Agencies and, on occasion, the F.B.I.

Keith has been kind enough to share his connection to Edgar Millen and provided photographs for us to enjoy and visualize life as a Mounted Policeman in the early 1900s and northern living. Read on!

RCMPVA Vancouver Division | September 6, 2020 at 8:44 PM | URL: https://wp.me/p2g73e-9JW




 

Unsubscribe to no longer receive posts from RCMP Veterans’ Association - Vancouver Division.

Change your email settings at Manage Subscriptions. 

Trouble clicking? Copy and paste this URL into your browser:

http://www.rcmpveteransvancouver.com/the-mad-trapper-part-ii/