I had made a trip up the Peel River to visit and check on some of the people who had a fishing camp about fifty miles south of Fort McPherson. There were four families with their tents set up and lots of racks of fish being dried over smoky willow fires. I recognized most of them and had lunch of fish soup with them, but there was one very big male I did not recognize. I introduced myself, and he gave me his name, which I felt was more of an Eskimo name because of the sharp syllables. Everyone appeared to be in good health as they sat around in the smoke, driven there by the profusion of mosquitoes. I was dressed in coveralls over my uniform, with gloves, the sleeves taped, and a hat with mosquito netting taped at the neck.

After spending an hour with them, I headed further south up the river. When the river turned west, I knew I had reached the edge of our Detachment area, and from there, it would be going into the Yukon. At that point, I turned around and headed back for Fort McPherson. As I passed the fishing encampment, all the men were in their boats attending to their nets, and the big native waved at me from the riverside as he was not working the nets.

When I got back to Fort McPherson, the Corporal advised me that he had received a message from Aklavik. They were looking for an Eskimo who had committed a very grievous assault on a woman, and they had been unable to locate him in or near their settlement. Inuvik had also been unable to find him. I contacted the members on the Single Side Band Radio and got his name and description. From their description, there was no doubt that he was the chap I saw at the fish camp. He matched the details they had given, and there were not too many very large Eskimos.

Early the next morning, I fueled up the boat, packed a lunch, and made arrangements with the Corporal to keep an eye out for me coming down the river. I planned to land on the sandbar to avoid turning in the current, as there was no place to land other than the dock. He was to bring the Jeep down to the sandbar because, according to the members, the man had a history of violence even when sober.

I headed south up the Peel River in the 26-foot freighter canoe, with two 18-horsepower outboard motors attached—one powering the boat and the second one tilted up as my standby motor. Three hours later, I arrived at the fish camp to find him still sleeping in his own tent. I explained to the locals that I was arresting him and would be taking him back to Fort McPherson. I asked them if they would help pack up his camp and load everything into his boat, which they did willingly.

I tied the boats together with slipknots so I could pull the rope and release them if necessary. I put his fuel tank in my boat, ensuring that by pressing the clip on the fuel line, his boat’s motor couldn’t run. With both motors running full tilt, we made good time going with the current.

The river is about a mile wide and fairly straight for a couple of miles to the south. As we approached the settlement, I used my binoculars and saw the Police Jeep leaving the lookout at the south end of the settlement. I began angling across the current, aiming to land on the side of the sandbar where the Jeep could drive freely to the water’s edge instead of attempting a sharp turn downstream into the dredged channel behind the sandbar and up to the dock.

As I began to angle across the current, he turned his outboard motor in the opposite direction. Instead of pulling the rope to disconnect the boats, I put the second motor down and started it. In no time, we were heading for the sandbar at a great speed. I reached down and disconnected his fuel line, causing his motor to quit. We were no more than 100 feet from shore, traveling quickly with my two motors running. I then unclipped both fuel tanks, and the motors stopped.

At that moment, we hit the sandbar going about 30 miles an hour. He stood up, and I jumped into the air to avoid the three sets of thwarts that stretched from beam to beam in the boat. The boats came to a stop, and I hit the sandbar, rolling several times. He also rolled over his camping equipment and landed face-first on the sand, skidding to a halt.

He picked up a large "beaver chew stick," approximately five inches in diameter and about nine feet long, and charged at me. I dodged the first swing and backed away, looking for something to defend myself with. After four or five more jabs from him, I found a stick about three inches in diameter and seven feet long.

With it, I was able to block and deflect his swings. I gave him a solid poke in the ribs when he was winding up for another strike. I blocked a swing and landed a heavy blow on his hand, which caused my stick to hit the side of his head. At that moment, an RCMP Police Otter plane flew overhead, preparing to land. His attention shifted to the aircraft, and I took the opportunity to poke him in the belly, knocking him to the ground. I followed up with several blows to his back, and he didn’t get up with his stick again.

By that time, the police plane had taxied up, and he stopped his attack. I tackled him, got him on the ground, and began to handcuff him just as the officers from the plane approached us.

About five minutes later, the Jeep arrived on the scene. I was upset and said, "I thought we agreed you’d meet me on the sandbar when I arrived." He explained that another member had told him the Officer Commanding (O.C.) was coming on the plane, so he had to return to his residence to get into uniform.

The officers decided to fly the suspect over to Aklavik with our member escorting him and then return to pick up the O.C. The O.C. had recorded some footage of the incident, capturing several of the suspect’s swings with the big stick and my defensive actions as they made their approach to land. This would serve as evidence if the suspect pleaded “Not Guilty” to the charge of assaulting a police officer.

Sadly, the woman he had assaulted died from her injuries, and he was charged with manslaughter, ultimately receiving a six-year sentence.