Shell Oil had a camp, and all the fuel and supplies were taken as far south up the Peel River as the tug could push the barges loaded with their camp. They planned to do seismic work, searching for oil in the foothills of the Richardson Mountains on the west side of the Peel River. Another barge dropped off all the explosives, and I had the locals build a secure building on the west side of the Peel River, about a mile away from the settlement, to store the explosives. I visited the camp, where they had one drilling trailer and one listening trailer, which they moved with two Nodwells. They also hired a number of locals to clear the seismic lines.

A major storm hit south, extending into the Yukon. The Peel River flows almost straight south and then west into the Yukon for over 100 miles, coming within about 100 miles east of Dawson City and originating at Chapman Lake. The five crew members forded the river with the Nodwell in the morning. However, when they returned that night, they noticed that the river was in flood stage. They attempted to cross the river, but when they descended the bank, the Nodwell went straight down into an 18-foot hole that the current had carved into the gravel bed of the river. The current carried the vehicle several hundred feet before leaving it submerged on its side, facing upstream, with only six inches of the box on the back showing above the water.

I was informed of the incident and traveled upstream in our 26-foot freighter canoe with a 28 HP outboard motor. When I arrived at the camp, the other Nodwell had already taken soundings of the water level before attempting to cross half a mile upstream, successfully returning to camp. I had brought my scuba gear and checked the cab of the submerged Nodwell. Four crew members were still in the passenger area, but the fifth body was missing. We stretched a cable across the river, and I hooked it onto the upper corner of the deck. They pulled the vehicle upright onto its big wheels and dragged it to the east side of the river and up a ramp where they had hauled the camp trailers earlier. I had the crew bring the four body bags to the camp, and they returned to Fort McPherson with the bodies so they could be sent south on the next scheduled flight.

I stayed at the camp overnight, as there was no sense in attempting a dragging operation with the river running so high. By morning, the river had dropped by about two feet. I conducted a visual search up and down the river for about 30 miles but did not locate the missing body. I repeated the search for two more days as the river slowly returned to normal levels but with no luck. Eventually, I returned to Fort McPherson.

I then decided to search by air using my aircraft. On my second trip, I spotted the body in the willows. I had prepared long strips of seismic tape with small stones tied to the ends, and I flew over the sandbar, dropping the strips until some landed in the trees on the opposite side of the river and others near the willows where the body was located. Afterward, I returned to Fort McPherson and arranged for a Twin Otter on floats to assist with the recovery. We landed on the river and taxied to the shore. The body was a good 300 yards from where the aircraft beached. The pilot, who informed me that he was there to fly and not help with body recovery, stayed in the aircraft.

I rolled the body into the body bag and dragged it over to the side of the floats. The man was large, and I struggled to lift him onto the floats. The floats had metal bars with pipe steps leading up to the door. As I climbed up, the body slipped into the water. On my second attempt, I tied the rope to both sides of the first rung of the steps and under the body, but I should have tied it to the top rung. By pulling on the rope, I could have gotten the body up to the door. Instead, I tied one end of the rope to the top step and lifted the other end close to vertical, using my shoulder to help bear the weight. Step by step, I finally rolled the body onto the aircraft floor. I dragged it forward and strapped it down.

Since the pilot refused to help, I decided to open the rubber body bag zipper to get some fresh air, as I had gotten sick from the smell while rolling the body. Within a minute or two, the pilot had his head out the window, barfing. I zipped up the body bag, untied the aircraft, and pushed it back into the current. He dropped me off at Fort McPherson and flew on to Inuvik.

Shell Oil closed the camp, selling most of the perishables to the Hudson Bay and the Free Trader in Fort McPherson. They planned to remove the camp and vehicles during the next shipping season. They were concerned about the Environment Department's reaction to all the empty barrels and barrels of fuel, so they sold the fuel to me for a dollar. I went up, cut some long willow and small poplar trees, and with a roll of binder twine, I bundled the barrels and tied them to the trees. I guided them downriver in the current, pulled them into the dredged channel, and rolled them up onto the shore. I gave the empty 10-gallon barrels to the Hudson Bay.

I struck a deal with the local airline operator, allowing them to fuel up at Fort McPherson in exchange for dropping off an equivalent amount of fuel at different RCMP detachments up the MacKenzie River, as well as in Yellowknife. This arrangement provided me with fuel caches for my airplane at various points, like Aklavik and Inuvik. I swapped the helicopter fuel for several char fishing trips up the Rat River. On the first trip, two of us caught 200 pounds of char and were back in Fort McPherson in four hours. On the next trip, we took a larger helicopter with more fishermen and brought back 600 pounds of char. They also made several trips with fuel in 10-gallon drums over to Coppermine in exchange for the fuel used at Fort McPherson, making the cost of operating my aircraft very reasonable compared to paying $3.00 a gallon.