Instrument flight rules (IFR) does not mean “I follow roads, or I follow railroads.” It involves using the basic instruments in the aircraft, allowing you to fly in zero visibility and get to your destination, and land safely. I got my first real experience of paying attention to the instruments in my aircraft when I had no other choice. I had often taken on a nice fluffy cloud and flown through it. There was enough turbulence in the cloud that you had to work at keeping the aircraft on track, keeping it level, and not losing any altitude. You had the altimeter to give you the height above sea level, an attitude indicator (turn and bank) that helped if you kept the bubbles centered in turn for a balanced change of directions and a compass for the direction that you planned on heading. It was not planned, and I was left with no other choice if I wanted to keep living, stay alive, and save my airplane.

Most of my flying experiences up to that point were Visual Flight Rules (VFR), where you usually chose good weather, stayed away from cloud banks, kept a sharp eye out for other aircraft, and watched out for flights of geese, ducks, and other birds along the way to make sure that you did not invite them through the windshield for dinner.

They had closed the Arctic Red River Detachment, and we were given the responsibility to do the policing of the settlement from Fort McPherson. I had the option of taking the 26-foot freighter canoe with an 18 HP outboard on a 40-mile trip down the Peel River, a 60-mile trip against the current of the west channel of the Mackenzie River, and then ten miles up the Mackenzie River to where the Arctic Red River dumps into the Mackenzie River and where the settlement is located. When I finished my duties there, I had areturn trip to look forward to. My other option was to take my aircraft on a three-quarters-of-an-hour flight in a heated cabin to get there and then have a comfortable flight back. The other option was a seven-hour boat trip in the open boat for over a hundred and ten miles and the same return trip on top of my day doing police work in the settlement. The days never ended because of the 24 hours that the sun goes around in the sky in the summer. At some latitudes, it does not come up above the horizon for a month and, in some places, for four months.

That year, we had a lot of forest fires in the area south of Fort McPherson, and at times, the visibility was really heavy with smoke, depending on the wind direction. I took off from the sandbar at Fort McPherson, and on the trip over early in the morning, the visibility forward was somewhat restricted, but you could make out the lakes, the features of the trees, and the features on the ground with only short periods of smoke obstructing your view of the ground from about the 500-foot level. The bands of smoke that I encountered and the heavy bands of smoke I flew through did not concern me as they were not that heavy. I had no difficulty in finding the settlement and took note of the compass heading that brought me right over the settlement, as there was no wind component to affect my track. I turned upriver because the banks of Mackenzie and the Arctic Red River are about 600 feet high. There was no smoke in the valley, and the wind was coming up the slot of the Mackenzie River. I turned back into the valley, began my letdown into the valley, and landed on the sandbar in front of the settlement. I tied down the aircraft to a big log that was mostly buried in the sand and had big metal loops that some other aircraft had organized for that purpose.

Fort McPherson is located 71 miles southwest of Inuvik near the west side of the Mackenzie Delta and 40 miles up the Peel River on the east side of the river. The Mackenzie Delta is a meandering bunch of rivers and lakes with a west and east channel, with most of the water going into these channels. Arctic Red River is on the east side of the river and runs into the Mackenzie River just below the Mackenzie River Ramparts. Then, the Mackenzie River turns abruptly north for about 10 miles before it dumps into the delta. The delta is nearly 210 km (130 miles) from north to south and ranges from 50 to 80 km (31 to 50 miles) wide, then flows into the Bering Sea of the Arctic Ocean.

I was pleased with myself for taking the aircraft instead of spending fourteen hours in a cold, open canoe at 15-20 mph. It gave me a chance to practice my navigation skills on a short flight in the comfort of a warm aircraft. On the flight over, I was flying at 500 feet above ground level, and you could see the ground the majority of the time. When I encountered heavy smoke for just a few minutes and zero visibility ahead, I would then fly back into light smoke. It gave me just a short burst of watching the instruments and some I.F.R. experience to keep the aircraft straight and level, and a short period of time watching the instruments and then coming out of the smoke on track and at the same altitude. My previous encounters with the clouds were always with a solid base and always for several thousand feet between the base of the clouds and the ground. Most often, the clouds represented some fairly rough air, and I got some practice keeping it on track, straight and level, and maintaining a good compass heading.

I was tied up most of the day with an investigation of an assault, finding witnesses, and taking statements and photographs of the aggressor. In the end, the person did not wish to lay any charges.

I had been involved most of the day and paid little attention to the diminishing visibility caused by the shift in wind and smoke in the air, with visibility in the valley down to about 100 feet. I figured when I took off there would be clearer air as there were no fires in the delta and above the valley. I thought it would be similar to the conditions I encountered on my trip over to the Arctic Red River.

I took off from the sandbar, and the forward visibility was very limited. I managed to go ten miles toward the delta by watching the embankment of the river on my left. When the reference of the embankment ended into the delta, I climbed to a thousand feet, as that would give me about four hundred feet over the land level of the ground between Arctic Red River and Fort McPherson, and set a track that I figured would take me home. When I came out of the sun shadow in the Mackenzie River embankments and climbed to the thousand-foot level, the smoke was lit up by the sun, and I could not even see the propeller at the front of the cowling.

The sun does not set at that latitude for about five months and continues to circle around the sky, not getting near the horizon until late August. It was not visible through the blanket of smoke, so the use of my sun compass was out of the question. I had considered returning to the Arctic Red River, but the likelihood of finding the notch of the river was not likely possible in the smoky conditions. Finding the river and then getting down on the sandbar was not considered possible. The fires had gotten much bigger during the day, and the wind had carried the smoke to the north, putting a lot more smoke into the air. Returning to the Arctic Red River, trying to find that slot in the 600-foot river banks, and being able to land on the sandbar did not make much sense. I set my track that would put me over Fort McPherson, and in fifteen minutes, there was no sign of the mile-wide Peel River or any indication of the trees below. There was a nagging thought that possibly there had been a change in the barometric pressure, and I could not recall if I had reset the altimeter at about ten feet above sea level, which is what it would be on the strip at Arctic Red River. 

So, I was not certain of the exact altimeter setting. I went lower and lower, and I was showing 100 feet on the altimeter when I saw trees directly below. I climbed a hundred feet up and continued on that track. When I started to see trees below, I knew I was in the foothills of the Richardson Mountains, which began to rise about 20 miles west of Fort McPherson. I had to climb up to make a turn and then come down to the altitude where I encountered seeing the trees, knowing that I would have a hundred feet of clearance above the trees by the Peel River. I set the same track that took me to the Arctic Red River and kept that up for fifteen minutes, not seeing the mile-wide Peel River on my return and going lower and lower until I could see the tops of the odd big spruce zip past below the wheels. At each turn, I had to pull up to safely make my turn and come back down to that same level above the trees and come onto the reverse compass heading back towards the Peel River.

I started calculating what I had for fuel. I was trying to remember the range, but I could only recall that I had 30 gallons of fuel on board when I took off from Fort McPherson, which usually gave me about four hours of fuel with some reserve. At cruise speed, it goes along at 114 mph, and the rate of climb was 88 feet per minute, but that was with maximum R.P.M power. I had a stall speed of 40 mph. The confusing part came when I realized that I had no recollection of what time I took off from the Arctic Red River, and I began making these calculations about the time I was concerned about how much time I still had in the air. The fuel consumption showed that I had less than half a tank showing on the sight gauges in the wing tanks, which had a tube from the bottom of the tank to the top that was visible inside the cabin.

I continued going east for 15 minutes, pulled up to make my turn, and came back down until I was at the considered safe altitude, then returned on the reverse track until I encountered the foothills rising again. I pulled up to make my turn and headed back, hoping to get a glimpse of the river or the settlement, but I saw absolutely nothing below me for the next two hours. When I got down well below the quarter of a tank showing on the sight gauges, I decided that I would come down after I made my turn and go to the lowest level that I could dare by keeping the trees in sight directly below me, hoping there were no abrupt hills as I kept the trees in sight all the way to the river. Several times, the wheels touched the tops of one or two tall spruce tree tops. Then, all of a sudden, the river appeared.

Then, the quandary hit me on whether I was upriver or downriver from Fort McPherson. I turned left because the river bank was on the pilot's side of the aircraft, and the top of the river bank was about fifty feet above the water, with fifty-foot trees lined up along the shore above that. I was about fifteen miles upriver from the settlement when I recognized exactly where I was in the Peel River and headed in the direction of home. When the river straightened out, I knew I had to go to the other side of the river to, where the sandbar and airstrip were located. I managed to slowly cross the river and found the other shoreline by angling slightly to the right. The smoke seemed to have lightened up just a little, and the sandbar appeared straight ahead. I dropped the power as I figured I was awfully close to empty on fuel and would not have enough fuel to make a turnaround for a landing into the wind. I rolled along on the sandbar and began braking as the weight of the aircraft overcame the lift of the wings at that speed. When the tail went down, the engine quit as the intake for the fuel was in the middle of the tanks, and it went to the back of the tank. I was completely out of fuel as I rolled to a stop, and that wide prop was standing vertically in front of the cowling.

I had frightened myself so much that I took the next scheduled flight out to Edmonton and sat in a Link trainer, getting my IFR endorsement from the Edmonton Flying Club. I could shoot any heading the instructor gave me, and I could shoot alternates and split the numbers. It was a pretty relaxed atmosphere as the Link's forward speed was zero, and I had all the confidence in the world because I was no longer going forward at more than a hundred miles an hour. I could shoot any heading right on with confidence. That was the story around getting an I.F.R. rating.

A few years later, when I was at Grande Prairie and the police aircraft, a “Turbo Beaver,” came in from Peace River, the pilot would phone me to see if I was available to sit in the right seat. He would be “under the hood” to shoot a number of approaches and landings. Peace River at that time did not have an ILS (Instrument Landing System) because the airport was considered a VFR (Visual Flight Rules) airport, as it was located down in the deep Peace River valley and was not set up for an ILS radio system. If you did not practice ILS landings regularly, you could not remain proficient at doing ILS landings safely. The “hood” is put on your head with an extended front so that you only have the instruments visible directly ahead of the pilot and cannot see what is happening outside. I would be sitting in the right seat and preventing anything from happening that was not going to be a safe landing. I kept a lookout for other aircraft in the immediate area of our flight. He always allowed me to put on the hood and see if I could take us back to the airport on the last flight of the day. Over the five years that I was there, I became proficient with doing ILS landings and approaches and helped others learn if their aircraft was equipped with ILS radio equipment.

 

Refurbishing TheAeronca15ac Sedan



Climbing out of the Municipal Airport in Edmonton, Alberta, I was about a thousand feet above ground level when the engine lost power, slowed, and came to a clattering stop with the propeller vertical in front of the cowling. I immediately called in a "Mayday," advising that I had engine trouble. I was over the rail yard and requested permission to return to the airport and land on the grass. The controller denied my request, repeatedly instructing me, “Stay away from the buildings,” at least four or five times. I tried restarting the engine, but it made a lot of noise. Despite this, I managed to make it around and land on the runway, then taxied to a tie-down area.

In the following days, I arranged for an aircraft engineer to help me take the wings off and remove the engine, which was then delivered to an overhaul shop. I also agreed to have the fabric replaced and the aircraft repainted, as it was a 1946 vintage and had not always been hung. I advanced money for the work as it progressed.

With the engine in one shop and the rest of the aircraft in another, I kept calling my friend at the RCMP hangar in Edmonton to check on progress, as both shops kept asking for more money. The engine shop finished the work in just over two weeks and delivered it to the airframe shop for installation. I made the final payment for their services.

I stopped hearing from the airframe shop for about a week. When I checked with my friend, he mentioned that he couldn’t reach anyone there either and had noticed the door locked on a recent visit, leaving him with a bad feeling. The next day, I went to the shop myself and found a sheriff’s notice attached to the door. Looking through the window, I saw the wings leaning against the wall, the entire airframe stripped of fabric, and the instrument panel empty.

I went to the sheriff's department with my logbooks and convinced them that the aircraft was mine. I arranged to pay a month's rent for the building to the owner and tried to find another aircraft engineer to finish the work. Staying with Doris and Cec Gale, I explained my situation. Cec helped make calls, but we struggled to find anyone available to take on the project. Finally, Cec agreed to sign off on the aircraft’s certification, provided everything was done to his satisfaction. He jokingly said his only tool was the pen in his shirt pocket.

The rolls of fabric and dope were already in the shop, so under Cec's direction, I began putting the aircraft back together. The original engineer had sent the instruments to another shop for servicing, even though some may not have needed it, so I had to pay for that as well. Eventually, I got everything installed and working properly under Cec’s strict supervision.

The aircraft originally had no defrost system on the windshield and a poor heater. Cec had me build a box around the muffler and run flexible piping up to the windshield base to provide warm air, similar to the Beaver and Otter systems. I also built a box under the dash with an adjustable door to direct heat to the legs and feet of the pilot and passengers. We even insulated the entire cabin for winter operations.

After inspecting all the linkage in the wings and covering everything with new fabric, I replaced the side windows, which were flat Plexiglas, while the forward cockpit Plexiglas had already been replaced before I purchased the aircraft. The insulation, with aluminum foil on both sides, brightened the interior of the aircraft considerably.

When we weighed the aircraft, it was perfectly balanced. The metal work around the muffler and the added insulation evened out the weight distribution. Cec signed off on the logbooks, certifying the aircraft as airworthy, but cautioned me that the compass would need recalibration due to all the new metal installed at the front. He explained that I could do this by flying north and south, adjusting the screws on the sides of the compass, or using a known alignment, such as a road.

I fueled the aircraft, and it started right away. The six-cylinder engine purred beautifully. After taxiing to the runway, I headed north. A few minutes out, I flew over the long runway at Namao Airport, which had large compass headings painted at each end. I began flying back and forth over the runway, tweaking the compass as I went. Suddenly, I had company—two jets appeared on either side of me, flying slowly with everything hanging out. The pilot on my left was motioning with his mic, clearly wanting to talk. I switched frequencies and made contact. They wanted to know why I was flying over an active military base. I explained that I was calibrating my compass after having my aircraft zero-timed and joked that highways don’t have large compass headings painted on them like the runway did. The pilot warned me, “Two more passes, then bugger off!” I replied with a joke, asking when they last corrected their own compasses.

After finishing my compass calibration, I headed for Fort McPherson, 1,917 kilometers (1,191 miles) from Edmonton. The new engine and paint job had improved my airspeed to 114 mph. I refueled at High Level, then at Fort Simpson and Norman Wells. Since it was only 431 kilometers (267 miles) from Norman Wells to Fort McPherson, I bypassed Fort Norman and flew directly to the sandbar airstrip at Fort McPherson.

By the time I returned home to Ontario, I had put over 10,000 miles under the wings of CF-OGP, and the aircraft was now completely zero-timed and ready for Arctic flying.

Soon after, I received word that I was being transferred from Fort McPherson to Coppermine. I needed to transport my aircraft, tundra tires and skis there. With marginal distances between stops, even though the aircraft was faster now, I rigged a fuel transfer system using a squeeze pump from an outboard motor and a ten-gallon tank secured in the back seat. This allowed me to transfer fuel into the right-wing tank during the flight.

I loaded up the tundra tires, skis, and supplies and took off on the 520-mile trip to Coppermine. The weather was great, and with a tailwind, I arrived with a quarter tank of fuel still left. I arranged a flight back to Fort McPherson and began preparing for the transfer from the bush to the barrens, with my aircraft safely tied down at Coppermine Airport.