With my impending transfer from Fort McPherson to Coppermine, my attention was drawn to how I was going to move my aircraft to the site of my new posting, and distance was the leading factor of concern. It was easy to consider that I had four hours of fuel on board, not considering possibly fifteen minutes of reserve. The aircraft traveled at 114 miles an hour with the small wheels and wheel pants, with the optimum range being 456 miles. The distance from Fort McPherson to Coppermine without any alternates would be impossible as it involved flying over to Inuvik and then to Coppermine, which would be an unreachable distance of 545 miles. Even if you refueled at Inuvik, it was not possible with 475 miles from Inuvik to Coppermine.

I had fuel caches down the Mackenzie River and over to Yellowknife, and the distance from Yellowknife was only 371 miles, so it was reachable but involved 1,106 miles of distance to travel. I looked at going up to Tuktoyaktuk and following the Arctic Coast across, but the distance from Tuk to Coppermine was ruled out because it was 571 miles, and I did not like the weather as it was usually not the best in the fall, and there were no weather stations between the two points. I was putting the outboard motors away for the fall, and the squeezable fuel pump on the fuel tank gave me a good idea. We had half a dozen of them in the shop in a box, and I had lots of ten-gallon empty fuel barrels around the compound that the helicopters had left behind.

I soldered a piece of metal tubing into a bung in a barrel, put lots of epoxy around it to make an assured airtight seal, and attached the pump to a hose leading up to the fuel tank in the left wing and another piece of hose inside to the bottom of the barrel. I secured the fuel tank with the seat belts. I loaded up the tundra tires and skis and waited for a good weather report from other pilots that currently flew east of Inuvik. I could check the weather on the single sideband radio with the weather in Coppermine and had them check with the pilots that flew up from Yellowknife on the scheduled flights into Coppermine. On the day the police plane was flying into Coppermine to fly the member I was replacing, I fired up my airplane and headed out. Four and a half hours later, I was sitting at the Coppermine airport when the RCMP plane landed. I flew back to Yellowknife with the police plane and then to Fort McPherson to join Jantje and our now two kids to be transferred to Coppermine.

Everyone of the houses is fully furnished and equipped with everything to cook and bake with and furnished with very durable furniture. All you have to do is pack your clothing and personal belongings with you on a transfer. I had constructed a number of wooden trunks that fit one inside another with six heavy leather handles that had slots so they laid flat and washers outside to give them lots of lifting strength. We had everything packed before I left.

Trouble with Being on Rations in Coppermine

We were going into a posting that was on “rations,” so we did not have to pack any food along other than our new baby food. The problem with being on rations was that you were eating things that were favored and ordered by previous members, sometimes three or four years prior. They had to have a couple of years of rations as the reliability of the shipping with Arctic ice conditions was not reliable. It was ordered through Ottawa, and they, in turn, ordered it out of Edmonton so that they could control what they thought were basic rations. From there, it was shipped by rail or transport truck to Hay River, then by river barge by the Northern Transportation Company across Great Slave Lake, down the Mackenzie River to the Arctic Ocean, along the Arctic coast, and into the Coronation Gulf to be off-loaded at Coppermine.

It was stored in a heated warehouse, and each month the food was rationed out and forms forwarded to Ottawa. Then they reduced what was taken off your salary, including the freight charges. There were things that you liked and things that were not pleasant to have to eat, like powdered milk and eggs. The canned bacon out of Norway and the canned Christmas puddings were in limited supply. There was no fresh fruit, and they were always canned and not in bottles as things were shipped on open barges and could encounter freezing temperatures in the late fall or early spring shipping. Each month you had to issue out your rations, including the condiments, and take it off the list of inventory of everything that we had in the warehouse. It was an all-day job keeping up the records just for the rations.

We did not have a vehicle or snowmobile when we arrived in Coppermine, so all we had to haul all of our re-supply from the barge to the warehouse was a steel-wheeled wheelbarrow that was 50 years old. It was a good three-quarters of a mile from where the barge was pushed to the beach and the heated warehouse. When the barge arrived, the Cpl. was in Yellowknife, and I was responsible for getting the entire shipment to the warehouse.

There were four other vehicles in the settlement, and they were all tied up hauling their own supplies off the barge. Every time I returned the wheelbarrow to the barge, there was a larger stack of RCMP-addressed goods that I had to sign off with the purser. When the warehouse was getting near to no more room with it piled seven feet high and some of the shelves that had always remained clear had to make room for new boxes, they were totally full. I had been running the old wheelbarrow back and forth for five fifteen-hour days and was totally exhausted, stiff, and sore.

At about that point, Father LaPointe came into the warehouse with a stack of invoices and wanted help in sorting out his supplies. He said he used the “RCMP” on his packages to cover the “Roman Catholic Mission Priest” so that his order would not be stolen or pilfered on the barge. He asked if he could leave what was ordered for the church in the heated warehouse. He said that the Catholic members in the past had allowed that, and he came on the day we handed out the rations. At that point, I was still tired and sore and became more than upset with what he had done and what he had just asked. I thought about how hard I had worked getting all those hundreds of wheelbarrow trips, and none of the people for whom the goods had been organized had been sent to help haul it up from the beach, nor had Father LaPointe been anywhere near the barge. I had seen him several times sitting or standing in the front of the church as I wheeled a load of packages up the gravel road to the warehouse.

When I wanted to see his list of orders, it was apparent that he had ordered food and perishables for about 20 or so different members of his parishioners. I told him to get all of the people that he had ordered food to come to the warehouse today and haul it over and put it in the church. At the end of the day, the rest of his order would be outside the heated warehouse, and he could pick it up from there. Within an hour, he had ten people hauling boxes from the warehouse to the church, which was about two hundred yards away.