In the mid-summer of 1969, I was posted to Coppermine (now called Kugluktuk), N.W.T., and received a radio call from the Tuktoyaktuk Detachment on the Single Sideband radio (SSB). They informed me that two people had come to their detachment and were intent on camping on the river that flows into the Arctic Ocean east of Paulatuk. They had obtained a permit for their trip from the government in Yellowknife. The two were ornithologists (bird watchers) and had planned to be there for three weeks. They were going to rent a canoe at Paulatuk and travel around the big headland before heading up the river from there. He had checked with the Hudson Bay manager, who informed him that the pair had not returned the canoe and that the water in the rivers was quite low locally due to light winter snowfall. The manager also mentioned that they had trouble fishing for char because of the low water. The ornithologists had stated they were going up the Hornady River as far as they could go by canoe and had ample food and clothing.

He chuckled when he told me that the Hornady River was in our Detachment area, and we would have to conduct the search from our point. He mentioned that Arctic pack ice had come south and was along the shore at Tuktoyaktuk, making a canoe trip from there currently impossible. When I asked how far it was from Coppermine, he said he knew it was at least 75 miles farther away from Tuktoyaktuk. He had already checked with Inuvik and Yellowknife for a police plane, but they were being serviced in Edmonton and not available to aid in the search. He had also checked the availability of rental aircraft in Inuvik, but the only aircraft available was a twin-engine Beechcraft, which was tied up with scheduled flights around the Mackenzie Delta and not available for more than a week.

I considered that we had the Detachment’s 45-foot diesel-powered sailboat, the “JJENNINGS,” but it could only travel at six knots. A 175-mile trip with the 26-foot canoe and 18-horsepower outboard on deck would take several days, assuming there was no pack ice along the coast between Kugluktuk and the Hornady River. I had my own aircraft with plenty of gas, sitting on the strip with tundra tires, ready for a flight. The weather was good, and I was eager for the comfort of a warm seat in the aircraft instead of a cold two-day trip by canoe, followed by a return trip along the Arctic coast, which was still uncertain due to the potential presence of ice. Additionally, the reported low water levels in the Hornady River might make it difficult to navigate the 26-foot freighter canoe with the 18-hp outboard motor.I phoned the DEW Line site, which was about 80 miles out of Coppermine (Kugluktuk), to notify them that I would be passing by in an hour and conducting a search for two overdue people in the area of the Hornady River. I told them if I located them, I would be climbing to an elevation where they could surely see me before landing in that area and asked if they could keep track of my location. I would appreciate it.

   

 

About a week earlier, I had flown over to the site and told them that if they could spot me coming, I would buy lunch. I had been there twice before, once in the winter, and knew I could fly low in the river valley that led right out to the DEW Line site. I phoned them before taking off and stayed close to the ground until I reached the river, then went out to the coast and radioed them when I was on the airstrip. I asked if they would mind picking me up at their airstrip and buying me dinner. They said they had turned their antennas as low as possible to the south and did not even get a blip of me on their screens. The DEW Line, created during the Cold War in the 1950s to watch for potential Russian bombers, stands for “Distant Early Warning.” Some sites are still manned, while others have been dismantled and abandoned across the Arctic, stretching from Baffin Island to Alaska.



I flew past the DEW Line site, gave them a big wing-wobble, and continued along the Arctic coast until I reached the Hornady River. About 30 miles up, I was surprised to find no water running over the riffles in the river. About 20 miles further, I located their camp, marked by a fluorescent orange tent and the two people waving. I climbed to the elevation as promised for the DEW Line and then came back down to land on a sandbar beside their camp. It was a man-and-wife team; she was an ornithologist as well. They thought I had not seen them when I climbed away and kept circling ever higher. I explained that I was doing that maneuver to be spotted by the DEW Line radar site so they would know where I planned to land.

They had encountered low water and decided to move their camp quite a few miles into the tundra, as they had never encountered so many different birds nesting in the area and wanted to photograph them all for his next book. When they returned to the river five days later, there was not enough water to float the canoe. They had been working their way downriver, carrying their camp and canoe for miles. I advised them that they had another 20 miles before they could find enough water to float the canoe and that they would need to portage around any rapids. They had snared a few rabbits and were not concerned about running out of food.

I gave them some emergency chocolate bars and dry soups from the plane to help extend their food supply. I took off and was back in Coppermine in just under two hours. I phoned the DEW Line, and they gave me the exact coordinates of where I had landed and confirmed that they had watched my return flight as well. They said it was a good exercise for them, as they spent most of their time looking towards Russia and only spotted commercial flights going over the top between Europe and North America.

I notified the Tuktoyaktuk Detachment of their situation and current location. They would have the Hudson Bay man contact the Tuk Detachment when he got back with the canoe and arrange for an aircraft to take them to Inuvik for their return south. A month later, I received a “Peterson Field Guide to Western Birds” in the mail and a big thank you for the effort to check on them. It made them realize that checking in with the RCMP was worthwhile and gave them a sense of how vast the Northwest Territories really are, with no signs of habitation.