My father got into an argument with my grandfather because he had turned the farm over to him and my mother. He had not stopped working on the railroad and came home, taking the horses to a local plowing match. He spent the prize money the horses had won on whiskey. Frustrated, he suggested that they should move the ever-growing family out, and he took the farm back from them. My father then bought the first house available, which was being sold for back taxes by the County of Tay. It was a three-room tarpaper shack with no basement or foundation located on about four acres, a mile and a half outside the town of Coldwater, Ontario. Since he was often living away with the railroad signal gang, it didn’t seem to matter to him what kind of conditions his family lived in.

Living with my grandparents in a six-bedroom brick house with all the amenities was comfortable, especially as much of the food came from the farm and gardens. This setup meant my father had very little cost to feed the family of four kids—three boys and a girl—allowing him to save more money for his drinking habit.

I remember that first winter vividly. The new house was impossible to heat. It only had a large kitchen stove, which my mother andI had to attend to regularly at night. I was tasked with cutting and splitting wood for the fire. The neighbors, who owned a couple hundred acres of bush and fields, allowed me to cut dead trees on their property. Despite my efforts, the house remained unbearably cold.

One weekend, when my father was home, he quickly realized how primitive the house was. He hadn’t chopped any wood for the night, so he borrowed a few rails from the fence at the back of the property in the dark to burn for warmth. It became clear that his contribution to raising the family was severely lacking. Realizing that the shack was unsuitable for his family, he decided that, because he was away so often with the Canadian Pacific Railroad (CPR) signal gang, he would hire a contractor to build a proper home for us. Before leaving for work again, he arranged a loan from the bank and hired a contractor to begin building in 1951.

During the construction, my grandfather on my mother’s side volunteered his horse and dirt scoop to dig the basement. The horse dragged the scoop, and the man operating it controlled the amount of dirt it picked up by adjusting the angle of the scoop with the two long handles at the back. The scoop was about five feet long and three feet wide, capable of holding around a foot and a half of soil when full. The horse, well-trained from years of digging basements, walked up the slope, turned around at the top of the pile, and returned to the basement hole for the next load.

One day, my grandfather asked if I wanted to try operating the scoop. I managed to haul several small loads of dirt up the pile. However, on one trip, I hit a large embedded rock. Encouraged by my grandfather to dig deeper, I urged the horse on, but the scoop caught the rock. Suddenly, I found myself airborne, landing on the horse’s neck, tangled in the collar and harness. The horse, startled, bolted over the dirt pile with me in tow. I eventually fell off and ended up in the scoop while the horse ran toward the back of the property, stopping only at the cedar rail fence. After that, I had had enough of basement digging. The rock that caused the commotion was nearly three feet in diameter and had to be dug out by hand and towed out with a chain.

Next, my grandfather dug a ditch from one corner of the basement to provide drainage. A pipe was installed to run underneath the footings for the walls. The contractor poured the footings and started laying cement blocks for the walls. My job was to haul the blocks from the truck to the work area using a wheelbarrow and sometimes carrying them by hand. As the walls went up, the horse was used to dump and pack soil around the foundation on all four sides.

I helped mix cement for the basement floor and mortar for the blocks. They installed a cistern in one corner of the basement and a basement entry in another. The main floor went up quickly, and the walls were framed and sheathed with six-inch boards inside and out. Sawdust and shavings from the local planning mill were used as insulation, packed between the vertical wall studs. I was responsible for filling a bag with sawdust and carrying it to the walls as they were built. To prevent pests, the workers dusted the sawdust with lime every few feet as they filled the walls. Once the walls reached the eight-foot level, the partitions were installed, and stairs were built leading to the basement and the second floor.

The layout of the house consisted of a front door, a back door, and a hallway that passed by the stairs leading to the back bedrooms. The kitchen and living room were at the front of the house. There were two bedrooms on either side of the hallway. The contractors also built brick chimneys for stoves in the basement and kitchen, and I helped by hauling bricks and mortar. On the second floor, the exterior walls were four feet high, and the same sawdust insulation was packed between the studs, but there was no insulation in the upper sections or the ceiling.

After the roof trusses were assembled on the ground, I helped the contractors lift them through the window openings to the roof. Meanwhile, my grandfather used the horse to spread the remaining soil around the yard, sloping it away from the house for drainage. The old tarpaper shack was sold to a neighbor, who jacked it up, placed it on two large trees used as skids, and, with two tractors, hauled it a quarter mile down the road to a new foundation.

Once the roof was boarded and shingled, they installed gutters, channeling rainwater to the cistern in the basement. They finished the rooms on the first floor with gyprock, painted them, and installed windows and doors. Everything was nearing completion when my father returned from working on the railroad, bringing the loan money with him. In a drunken state, he picked a fight with the contractors, accusing them of overcharging for insulating the roof and finishing the upstairs. The argument escalated, and he ran them off the property.

Thus, the finishing work was left incomplete, with much of the upstairs left uninsulated.He refused to pay them anymore, and they walked off the job, never returning.

The upstairs area remained unfinished and uninsulated until I completed it after his death in 1975. It stayed that way for over 33 years. I remember having to sleep with three layers of blankets in the winter, seeing my breath inside the house, and in summer, it was unbearably hot. Water would drip off the roofing nails after they frosted over during the night, only to melt when the sun hit the roof. There was no proper heat distribution from the basement to the first floor or from the main floor to the second floor other than leaving the door open at the bottom of the stairs, which blocked the hallway to the bedrooms.

In 1969, when I was working as a "powder monkey," loading drilled holes in the granite rocks on the Highway 400 extension to Highway 69, I was granted a “powder monkey” license and was able to purchase dynamite from the local hardware store. I dug a well by punching a hole in the center with a crowbar and placing a quarter of a stick of dynamite inside. When the charge went off, it blew most of the hard soil out, and I only had to dig and clear a little around the edges. This process continued with increasing portions of dynamite until I reached 20 feet down and hit an aquifer, filling the well with seven feet of water. I then hired a tow truck to lower four-foot cement culverts into the well. After placing four of them, my father came home from the legion, drunk, and picked a fight with the tow truck operator, who promptly left. I ended up rolling the last ring of cement into the well by myself, using planks.

My father had spent much of his life “witching for wells” in the surrounding district, believing that without his involvement, the water wouldn’t be drinkable. Since he hadn’t been part of the well's construction, he refused to use it. Instead, he covered it with railroad ties, and for 41 years, the family continued to haul water from the farm well across the road. There was a five-gallon pail under the sink, which we dumped outside. When I went back home for his funeral, I dug the ditch, piped the water into the house, and installed a pressure system and pump. I also did the plumbing and installed a toilet, tub, and shower.

At the time, I was living in Grande Prairie, Alberta, and my mother and brother were still in the house. I couldn’t stand them continuing to live in such poor conditions. So, working 20 hours a day for six days straight, I installed a bathroom, switched the power from 110 to 220 volts, bought an electric stove, installed new cabinets, insulated the roof, and laid out four rooms upstairs. I also bought an oil tank, installed a furnace, and removed the kitchen stove. I installed a grill for heat distribution from the furnace and arranged for a septic field to be put in. For 24 years, they had endured an outhouse for bathroom facilities. The frustrating part was that my father had helped move a toilet from his younger brother’s place next door when their mother had a septic system installed. Rather than dig a proper hole, he placed the outhouse over the only old well on the property.

When settling his estate, he had only $87 in his bank account, and I had to cover his funeral expenses. In 1953, he got a job as a signal maintainer at Medonte Station, which was closer to home and eliminated his travel. Unfortunately, the legion was always on his way home, which only worsened his alcoholism, leaving no money for upgrading the house. Enduring an upbringing with both parents as alcoholics, I made a pact with myself that my children would never see me drunk. Now, my daughter is 57, and my son is 55, and they have never seen me under the influence of alcohol.

The first time I came home to visit while working in Newfoundland, I had been involved in protecting the Paper Mill property when the Teamsters Union tried to unionize the workers. We had to guard the dams built to control water levels. When they cut down trees and floated them in the lake, the logs were sent downriver to the pulp mill. One evening, during my shift, I noticed an aircraft landing at the far end of the lake and assumed it was a fishing party. A canoe appeared in the center of the lake, which I also dismissed as a fishing group.

As it grew dark, I was patrolling the river side of the dam when suddenly, there was a massive orange flash and a loud explosion above me. A portion of the dam, about 20 feet from the top, gave way. The aircraft had delivered a torpedo. I was swept away by a wall of water. There were no trees along the riverbanks for a couple of miles, and every time the river dropped, I was submerged in boiling water and hit the bottom. Fortunately, being a strong swimmer, I managed to grab onto a tree branch and pull myself out about eight miles downstream. In the dark, I made my way back to the dam, but I was on the wrong side of the camp and the road.

The explosion had left a hole in the dam 20 feet from the top, and much of the wooden structure had been swept away by the force of the water. I crossed the shaky remains of the walkway only to find that my partner and our vehicle were gone. He had waited for me for over an hour before leaving, assuming I had perished. He had only suffered hearing loss from the explosion, as he had been crossing the top of the dam when the blast knocked him ten feet down into the trees.

Later, I was assigned to protect the mill property on the midnight shift. Around 1:00 a.m., someone threw a four-foot cord of wood from the darkness, striking a member of the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary on the head, killing him instantly. There were over 100 people on the picket line across the chain-link fence, but no one admitted to throwing the wood or seeing who did it.

After this, I took my holiday and returned home, only to find my father hosting a drinking party with five railroad workers. They were celebrating an upcoming strike, demanding a four-cent hourly wage increase. They showed me their voting ballots, saying all they needed to do was turn them in for Monday’s strike vote. I asked to see their ballots to check if the numbers were unique. When they handed them over, I burned all six ballots in the stove, telling them I now knew where six votes were missing. The strike vote would claim 100% approval, but we knew that wasn’t true. The strike lasted a month, and they settled for a three-cent raise. I sent my father a letter, reminding him he’d have to work another 11 years to make up for the lost wages. He was always seen with a "roll-your-own" cigarette hanging from his mouth, even after undergoing cancer operations on his lips and throat. He eventually died from lung cancer, still smoking until the last time I saw him. He was a slow learner.

Here is a picture of one of the five cairns that I built on the location where the five members of the "Lost Patrol" died.I made cairns similar to this one on the site where they died.I was able to locate the sites with the help of the localswhowere involved in the local search for their bodies. The ashes of their campfires were still evident.I cut down trees to make the cairns to make an opening to the chairs visible from the fiver and made routed out details of their death;regimental numbs, and dates of their death on the framed wooden planks.