When I joined the RCMP in 1961, I underwent the horse riding routine that involved all the maneuvers carried out by the Musical Ride. We did this by commands from the instructor, where the Musical Ride changed patterns on the command of the right marker and the flash of the staff. This was before 1970, when the equitation program ended, except for those training for the Musical Ride in Ottawa. It was one of the more physical parts of the training. You got up at 5:30 a.m., went to the stables, and cleaned the stables for 75 horses and two stallions in their own compound. After that, you changed your clothes, went for breakfast, and then "on parade" by 8:30, followed by classes or physical training.

We had 123 subjects, 93 of which covered police work, typing, sections of the Criminal Code, and some federal statutes. The remaining subjects were physical, such as swimming, equitation, shooting, police holds, photography, pursuit driving, boxing, water rescue, marching, physical education (which involved running in steps for miles), and foot drills. I believe that had they printed up two days of the syllabus, I would have purchased it to get out because you were tired all the time, and it seemed you were forever drawing extra duties for the simplest of reasons.

I played the bugle and drums when I was in the Army Cadets in high school, and I was chosen with four other guys in our troop to perform the lowering of the flag ceremony for the tourists. We all had to dress in boots, breeches, red tunics, Stetson hats, and full Sam Browne belts. We marched up and down the parade square until the sun was about to hit the horizon. We would then march over to the flagpole at the side of the parade square, lower the flag while the “Last Post” was played with the bugle, and fold the flag. Afterward, we would march off to the barracks. That was not where it ended, as this went on all summer. We had to return, get out of uniform, and clean and polish our boots. In the summer, the sun did not go down until after 10:00 p.m. Some clown who never marched with a kettle drum decided that we needed more practice, so a few more hours of practice with the bugle were ordered. I have never attempted to play the bugle or drums since that session of flag lowering.

When we began training, there were 18 troops of 32 members each at Depot, and it took a couple of weeks for all of our troops to assemble. The three members from Quebec were the last to arrive. Jacques came from the east side of Hudson Bay in a little fishing village and had never seen a car or truck before landing in Montreal. You had to have a driver’s license to join the RCMP, so the Post Office issued him one. I had worked welding on the Trans-Canada Pipeline and was used to receiving a paycheck each week we worked. When we received our first paycheck, I initially thought it was not too bad for a week’s work, only to realize it was for six weeks’ pay. At the time, our yearly salary was $2,600.00, and you could work as many hours as you could stand.

During driver training, I was the only one in the troop with a car (a 1959 Triumph TR-3), and I had to teach Jacques how to drive. He is the only person I know who could get the front wheels off the ground with a six-cylinder shift-on-the-wheel Ford. His comprehension of the gear, gas, and clutch seemed to be beyond his coordination ability. When it came to pursuit driving, the instructor wouldn’t even ride with him. Jacques’s father sent him money to buy a car, and a few weeks later, while attending court in downtown Regina to familiarize us with how the court operated, Jacques’s name was called. He walked to the front, pleaded guilty to doing 90 miles an hour down Dewdney Avenue in Regina, and paid the fine.

When women joined the force in 1975, they could not be asked to clean the stables and groom the horses, so the program was shelved. The horses were sold or returned to their owners, who avoided the expenses of maintaining a horse for two years and could sell it for more bragging rights thanit had RCMP training. The stables became classrooms for simulated crime scenes and role-playing solving domestic disputes.

If you were scheduled for equitation, it meant a half-day of riding. You had to go the night before and clean and saddle soap all of your horse's tack. If it was an afternoon ride, you did not have to clean the tack. We rode English-style saddles that were like a second skin on the horse, with stirrups attached and double reins. When we began training, the instructor for equitation gave us all a peanut to put between our knees to see if we could crack it. By the time we finished equitation, our grip on the saddle was such that you could crack a walnut. All changes of direction and changes of lead (which foot the horse moves forward to change direction for a turn) were signaled to the horse by knee pressure so they could change the lead foot into the intended turn. This is what made it look as if the entire formation was flowing into turns.

Every horse knew how to empty the saddle, and there was no pommel to grab like on a Western saddle, so your knee grip was the only thing that saved you from a very unceremonial trip to the dirt of the riding school, which was covered in sawdust, horse shit, and piss. The walls of the riding school were sloped from the top down, with a wide portion at the bottom, so they could not rub their legs as they went around the riding school. A lot of the horses could bite and kick, so you always had to be on guard when handling them and not in the saddle. We had to brush and groom every horse in the stable, and many of them had the dirty habit of stepping on their feet, so you had to learn what signaled their intentions before the horse buggered up the spit shine on your ankle boots.

Grooming the stallions that were housed in a separate stable was a really dangerous job as they had to be cross-tied so they could not get at you to bite, and they had the foot-stepping down to a science as they were always restless and always moving, so you could not anticipate their moves. One morning, we were grooming the stallions, and my partner had not tied the knot tight enough on one side. The horse reached around and grabbed him just above the belt and below the ribs, physically throwing him over the six-foot metal stall. For months, he was every color of the rainbow along his side, with his shirt and fatigue jacket preventing the teeth from breaking the skin.

We played a game in the riding arena with the horses, pushing a big, inflated seven-foot ball. Some horses really enjoyed it, while some didn’t, and others were deathly afraid of the ball. It was a test of the rider to see how well they could encourage their horse to push the ball to the other end of the arena. That day, I had a horse called “Rouge,” the biggest and, no doubt, the strongest horse we had. He had four wooden legs and was the roughest riding horse in the stable. He got behind the ball, pushing it to the other end of the arena. Another member had his skittish horse trying to back up as fast as this big ball came towards it, and it wheeled around and headed for the other end of the arena at full gallop. The outside door was open, with just the sloped interior wall a good seven feet high. The horse sped up to make the jump, and the member stayed in the saddle. You could hear the clatter of the shooed horse on the four-inch squares of cement, then silence. They opened the sloped portion, and neither the horse nor the rider was at the end of the stables. We found them out in the back pasture, with the horse covered in froth and the member still in the saddle. The horse was excused from any further push-ball exercises.

During my training, the troubles with the Doukhobor sect in central BC erupted, with schools being burned, power stations being blown up, and 300-pound naked ladies lying down on the streets in protest. It was decided that our troop would be trained for riot control on horseback, hoping that the sight of 32 horses coming down the street would prompt the naked protesters to seek shelter. For a month, we practiced all sorts of riot formations, fought off troops of members, and endured tear gas and rifle blanks being shot off in the riding school. The tear gas did not affect the horses, but it was most unpleasant to ride around inside the riding school when it was dispersed. We loaded up the horses on the train in the middle of the night twice, but no one in Ottawa had the balls to send us into BC. I was in training for eleven months, so you can imagine how much the training has been reduced when they are putting recruits out in the field in six months, only to the larger detachments for "Recruit Field Training."

Western saddles prevent signaling because the saddle is built up from a wooden "tree" and heavy leather that you sit in, directing with reins and shift of weight. There are three different dressage ways of making the horse learn to work with you: the right way, the wrong way, and then the RCMP way, which we learned, all involving disciplined enforcement by the rider. If you did not perform the maneuver correctly, it was no fun doing 25 push-ups in the riding school with your nose in the horseshit.

After I retired, I went to work for Mega-Tech, initially to train the smaller police departments and bylaw members so they could use the instruments properly and give evidence in court. When we sold their department a radar or laser, we would train all of their members and offer the training to other departments in their area because the RCMP did not go out of their way to train other agencies when they had a course taking place in their area. I began selling all sorts of police equipment, including strobes and the then-new LED lights. I also taught anyone taking the laser course how to use lasers for accident investigation and measuring crime scenes. I patented that course and was paid to give it as far south as Dayton, Ohio. I had prepared manuals of instructions when I was still in the force and had the foresight to have them copyrighted when I was doing the same job of teaching courses while still in the force.

I believe my course became the standard for instruction throughout the force. About six months after I retired, I received a summons to appear in court for infringement of patent laws. The chap in charge of the collision analyst program had collected one of my laser course manuals, which I had given to an RCMP member who attended. He claimed it was identical to the RCMP manuals. When he finished his list of offenses, I approached the court while he was still on the stand and handed the judge three sealed, patented copies of the manual that I had made while with the RCMP. I gave the judge exact copies contained in the sealed, patented envelopes and asked him to compare them with the one presented by the witness. The judge reprimanded the witness for wasting the court's time. My only consolation was that the witness retired a short time later.

I went to the Chicago Institute of Technology and became a collision analyst. For seven years, I went to every fatal and serious motor vehicle accident in the central portion of Alberta. I continued to fight with Ottawa to recover a portion of my expenses, but I got no support from the member in charge of the local program.

Another collision analyst and I did a lot of work on the examination of headlights, taillight bulbs, and brake light bulbs to see if, by microscopic examination, we could determine if they were working or not working when the accident occurred. We had gone to the local car scrapyard and collected bulbs from vehicles that had been involved in accidents, creating an inventory of broken and live bulbs. I then designed and built a vertical ramp with a 20-foot plank, a slide, and a place to mount the light sockets and wires that ran down to our battery. The bulbs were placed in the element and dropped, and the filament distortion was then examined to see if they were operating or not operating. After doing this a hundred times, we ran out of money to buy more bulbs and exhausted our supply from the wrecking yards. By dropping them from different heights, we could determine the amount of force being applied to cause that amount of distortion of the filaments on the different varieties and sizes of bulbs. We took a lot of pictures and submitted a report for the information of other members of the program, but we never got any credit for our time and effort.

I investigated one accident at Sherwood Park where a kid on a bicycle made a circle out onto the highway in front of oncoming cars, not realizing how fast the car was traveling, and was struck and killed. I did the shadow and skid mark measurements and came up with a speed of 170 MPH. The sergeant in charge of the collision analyst program came to the scene the next day, and the shadow marks had disappeared even though I had painted them in. His measurements did not match mine, and he accused me of exaggerating the speed and removed me from the program. About six months later, the girl driving the car came to the Sherwood Park Detachment, and I took her statement. She said her brother’s drinking buddy had been fondling her, and she wanted to get rid of the drunken nuisance by getting to Edmonton as fast as she could. She had put her foot down on the accelerator, and the car was going as fast as it could when the accident happened. Her Aboriginal brother was in the back seat, passed out, and woke up when the accident happened. He had told her repeatedly not to say anything to the police. I took the statement to the sergeant in "K" Division headquarters, and he read it, then just got up, put on his coat, and went home. I retired shortly after that and went to work for Mega-Tech, teaching radar, and laser courses wherever we sold a set.

I was invited back to "Depot" Training facilities in Regina and trained the instructors. Of course, we sold them radar and laser, and my courses were used to ensure the recruits came out of training knowing how to use speed-measuring equipment. When I was at “Depot” Division Training Centre, it saddened me to see how the physical training had been reduced and boxing eliminated, as well as swimming, water rescue, and first aid reduced. I knew how often these skills had helped me in dealing with day-to-day police work during my 33 years of active police duties. The women could not be sworn at, did weight training with just the bar and no weights, and did not have to do push-ups or chin-ups in training. Their police hold would be of no value when they got field experience and had to realize that they could never afford to lose a fight when dealing with real-life police work in the field.

I was also fortunate when I went north to the Yukon to spend three weeks in Edmonton, going to different hospitals and learning diagnostic medicine (pulling teeth, suturing, giving medication for different maladies, and diagnosing TB and appendicitis). This involved the local members being the local medical practitioners. It ended when a member performed a successful appendix operation with a doctor on the Single Side Band Radio in Yellowknife, directing his every move. It happened during spring break-up at a northern detachment when they could not get an aircraft into a northern settlement to evacuate the patient. Ottawa even took away the big medicine chests that were at every small detachment in the North that did not have a nursing station. That was a real relief because every month, you had to go through the medicine chest, and two of us had to count each and every pill of the narcotics and certify their presence with another member present, then delete the numbers that had been administered, to whom, when, and why. The record-keeping was a real pain. There were a lot of settlements that did not have a nursing station or any doctors in the area, and the RCMP was the only medical service equipped and source of drugs in the entire area.

I went ahead with first aid courses to different levels to satisfy the Yukon Game and Fish Department and obtained a guide's license for the Yukon Territory. This was prompted when a Staff Sergeant retired and took over the department, and he was intent on making hunting big game in the Yukon a world-class hunt so he could get some of the natives involved in guiding and outfitting. There was only one big game-guiding service at that time, and he was booked for years ahead. He sent invitations to all the sports magazine editors in the U.S. and Europe, inviting them to a guided hunt and mentioning Dall sheep, goats, moose, elk, caribou, grizzly bears, black bears, wolves, and wolverine. It was offered as a walking hunt as he had no horses available and just had a few tents and camping equipment available from the Forestry Department. He approached a number of members to see if we would be interested in helping out and volunteering to support his project.

I took my holidays and guided Fred Bear, the president of the Bear Bow Company, to a record Dall sheep that still is the top sheep in Pope and Young scoring records. When he offered me a bunch of cash, I told him that I was a member of the RCMP and could not take any money. I had packed the head, hide, and hindquarters, and he had packed his bow and front quarters off the mountain. A day later, I got a call from the airport saying there was a package there for me. When I went to pick it up, he had left all his arrows, bow, and all of his camouflaged gear, including his footwear, with a note that said, “You now have the best bow in the North American Continent.” He wrote that it was the best hunt he had ever been on. I guided the owner of Field and Stream magazine to a big moose within about ten miles of Whitehorse, and he shot one of the really big black bears at the Whitehorse dump. He was really pleased with it because it had a big white “V” on the chest. He planned on a big full head mount to display the white on the chest. I helped in doing the skinning to best accommodate the planned mounting. We were able to retrieve the moose with a tow truck, and he donated the meat and hide to the local natives living in Whitehorse.

I had access to a Piper “SuperCub” aircraft and did a lot of flying, taking pictures of games in the area, so I knew where a lot of different wild games were located at that time. It was not difficult to know where they were hanging out; it was just deciding the shortest and easiest way to get to where they were and advising some of the other volunteer guides on where their game could be located. It turned out to be a real success story because presently, there are 20 outfitters in the Yukon, and the entire area is divided up. They promote hunting throughthe variety of game in their area, and there are presently in excess of two hundred guides, most of them natives to the area, representing a lot of money coming into the area.

I knew the only outfitter and made a deal with him that I would take charge of bringing out his string of horses and camp at the end of the hunting season if I could use his outfit to guide my father and a good friend to a hunt of their lifetime on the way out. My father went hunting every year back in Ontario, and it was more of a drunken vacation, but I offered him a hunt of his lifetime as well as thenext-door neighbor that I grew up with so they could come together. I even bought him an airline ticket from Toronto to Whitehorse and returned and sent him all sorts of Yukon hunting brochures and pictures. A week before they were scheduled to leave for the Yukon, I got a phone call saying that they got a map of Canada, and they both figured that it was too far to come to go hunting. Neither of them had ever been on an airplane or had either of them driven out of Ontario. I had a heck of a time getting the money back from the airlines for his flight.

This being the local medical practitioner ended when a member performed a successful appendix operation with a doctor on the Single Side Band Radio in Yellowknife during spring break-up at a Northern Detachment, when they could not get an aircraft into a northern settlement to evacuate the patient.Ottawa even took away the big medicine chests, that were at every small detachment in the North that did not have a Nursing Station.That was a real relief because every month, you had to go through the medicine chest and count every pill of the narcotics, certify their presence with another member present, and then delete the numbers that had been administered to whom, when, and why.The record-keeping was a real pain.There were a lot of settlements that did not have a Nursing Station or any doctors in the area, and the R.C.M.P. was the only medical service that was equipped and source of drugs in the entire area.