We used to help the Mining Recorder patrol the creeks, and he supplied us with a 500-foot tape to measure the length of some of the claims. Then, word got out that the police were checking the placement of the claim stakes and measuring the claims, which kept a lot of miners honest. Those who had pits too close to the edge of their claims were measured, and we reported them to the Mining Recorder. They sent people out to check, as we had no way of knowing which direction the miners went at the bottom of the shaft—they could be following the "pay dirt" into their neighbor’s claim.

The Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP) encountered a great deal of difficulty whenForty Mile Creek ran from Alaska into Canada. In Alaska, American claims were 1,000 feet long, and miners could register up to three claims per person. In Canada, however, claims were limited to 500 feet, and one person could only register one claim unless it was a discovery claim, in which case they could register one additional claim on that watercourse.

Many American gold seekers came into the Forty Mile region, and before the arrival of the RNWMP, they had their own form of vigilante justice. When the RNWMP, who also acted as Mining Recorders, arrived, they refused to allow the Americans to register such large claims or more than one claim per person unless it was a discovery claim. This caused a lot of upset among the American miners.

Depending on how one measures it, the Klondike gold region is between 750 and 1,500 square miles. Approximately 200-300 miles of creeks were mined, with claims measuring 500 feet at the creek bottom, extending from rimrock to rimrock (the tops of the creek banks directly opposite the flow of the creek). Where the creek bent, many fraction claims were recorded. These claims were measured with the 500 feet on the outside curve at the top of the bank to the last in-line claim post. Claims were numbered up and down from the discovery claim.

Once a claim was registered, miners were required to make $600 worth of improvements—such as building a cabin or sluice boxes, moving 200 yards of soil, or digging a 40-foot shaft—within a year. If they did not, they had to pay the government $600 each year to keep the claim in good standing. Failure to pay on the registration date resulted in forfeiture, and the claim could be re-registered by anyone.

When I was in Dawson, I had claim number four below the discovery claim on Bonanza Creek for five years. I used it to take friends and visitors to experience gold panning. It was difficult to keep track of who the claims were registered to and even more challenging to get permission to enter the claim and pan for placer gold. Most of the creeks were pretty well mined out, and the heavy pay areas were depleted. The only pay streak on my claim was high on the shoulder of the creek, and the access road leading further up the valley went through my claim on this high shoulder.

A choice bottle of spirits given to the grader operator removed a lot of the overburden, qualifying for the improvements needed to keep my claim open. While grading the road each year, he would uncover some of the pay streak, which was only about three to five inches thick, and my parking lot got bigger each year. Pay dirt is an off-colored red compared to the surrounding gravel. I would have guests dig up some pay dirt, load it into a pan or sometimes a couple of five-gallon buckets, and carry it down to the water in the creek. I would demonstrate how to separate the gravel from the gold, and if they were careful, they could recover a dozen or so specks of gold. However, the 200-foot climb back up to the ever-extending parking lot was challenging, and the novelty of gold panning wore off quickly as the effort of getting up and down the embankment and working in extremely cold water became unpleasant, even with rubber gloves. Carrying the buckets—or even just a pan of gravel—was a lot of work.

The Geological Survey of Canada estimated the area of placer gold to be 800 square miles. This was all within our detachment area, which extended halfway to Old Crow. Because we had a summer road that later became the Dempster Highway, we patrolled all the way to Fort McPherson in the Northwest Territories. Our detachment area extended 150 miles north, over 200 miles east to the NWT border, west to the Alaska border, and about 70 miles south, bordering the Mayo detachment area, which included the Stewart River. I never measured or calculated the total square mileage of our detachment area. There were only four members in the Dawson City detachment when I was posted there.

Oil exploration was taking place in the Eagle Plain area, and they had “winter roads,” which were seismic lines that ran perfectly straight for miles in a northerly direction. Every five miles, these lines branched east and west from the main north-south lines. The roads were only maintained during the winter when Seconi Mobile was drilling for oil in the area. I once drove to within about 40 miles of Old Crow, to a drill site called “Molar.” From the top of the hill there, you could see the lights of the village. I claim to be the first member of the RCMP to have driven a police car across the Arctic Circle.

Because there were aircraft and helicopter companies in Dawson City, we had access to them for large searches or investigations in remote areas, as well as access to the RCMP Air Division’s single Otter aircraft stationed in Whitehorse. One search I led involved a group of three prospectors/investors who had hired a helicopter out of Whitehorse and secretly flown into the Ogilvie Mountains northeast of Dawson City. They filed a flight plan from Whitehorse to Dawson City and closed it with the Department of Transport (DOT) in Dawson City, so there was no reason for us to check on their whereabouts, as we had no knowledge they were in our detachment area.

Their backup was a fourth partner in Vancouver. After sobering up a week or so later and realizing they hadn’t contacted him, he reported them missing to the Vancouver City Police. Their secret "motherlode" was drawn on the back of a cigarette package, with "Chapman Lake, Yukon" written and an arrow pointing northwest from the writing. The Vancouver policeman gave me the contact details of the fourth partner and turned him over to me on the phone.

I spoke with him, but he had no idea what the others were wearing or what colors their jackets or clothes were other than recalling they wore "bush clothes." When I suggested brown camouflage, he agreed that’s what they had been wearing when he last saw them in Vancouver. They had hats with mosquito shields and were prospecting northeast of Dawson City, looking for silver, gold, and a large nickel deposit that he had found. They were going to stake the claims and register them with the Mining Recorder in Dawson City. He sounded legitimate and knowledgeable about prospecting.

He told me that, a few years earlier, he had hired a local Native man and his son to take him down the Yukon River by boat to Forty Mile. From there, they packed his camp and supplies about 40 miles east into the Ogilvie Mountains, where he prospected the area but didn’t quite reach the location of the mineral deposit he had identified with the Natives. When he returned to Dawson City that fall, he ended up drinking and didn’t have the money to register the claims. He had carried his camp and supplies to the claim area, taken twelve pictures showing the deposit’s extent, and spent time in Vancouver trying to find a partner to develop the find.

They had the samples tested and assayed, showing good signs of nickel, gold, and silver. Satisfied that there was good potential, they put together a partnership. Since most helicopters could only carry three passengers, the fourth man stayed behind in Vancouver. He said his partners flew to Whitehorse and took a helicopter from there to the location he had vividly described. He had staked the claims, leaving pieces of his red plaid shirt on the claim posts, and had shown their location only on a road map of the Yukon. He gave me the names of his partners.

I confirmed with the airline that they had flown from Vancouver to Whitehorse and checked with the local Department of Transport office to confirm when the helicopter flight plan was closed. The DOT office is in town, and the airport is five miles away. They assumed the helicopter was still at the airport, but I had been there earlier that morning, and there was no helicopter matching their description. I checked with the local fuel distributor, who confirmed delivering twelve 10-gallon drums of fuel to Chapman Lake for a helicopter out of Whitehorse.

This was before the internet, but I knew where Chapman Lake was located—at the end of the gravel section of the Dempster Highway, about 150 miles from Dawson City. To get there, you head south on Hwy #2 for forty miles, then turn north onto Hwy #5 (the Dempster Highway) and continue almost true north for about seventy-five miles to reach Chapman Lake.

We hired a local helicopterand arranged for fuel to be driven to an elevated cache I had built the year before in preparation for a dogsled trip from Dawson City to Fort McPherson. If we needed more fuel, a note would be left on the signboard at the cache, and an envelope would be dropped off at the detachment to report our flights and search locations.

I took a large tent, tent stove, cots, sleeping bags, and cooking equipment, and another member dropped me off in our station wagon. We had no radio contact with Dawson City, as the vehicles didn’t have radios. Instead, we made arrangements for the telephone operator to call Whitehorse for us and reverse the charges. We phoned into the detachment on the telephone, using an old crank phone at the Ogilvie Ridge Lodge. The operator took our message, and the police radio dispatcher relayed it back to Dawson City.

We searched the area for two days. Chapman Lake is about five miles from the Dempster Highway, with deep draws and cliffs surrounding the lakeshore. We found and interviewed many First Nations people who were trapping the lake and creeks in the area. None of them had seen the helicopter we were looking for.

From where we located them, they were over 100 miles from their helicopter, and they had been walking for ten days. We had been searching for them for six days and had spent 81 hours in the air (as I signed the invoice for what was on the clock). The pilot only had a small .22 caliber survival rifle and had expended his 100 rounds, killing ptarmiganand rabbits and shooting graylings in the creeks and small lakes they came across.

All of the caribou they saw spooked several hundred yards away, and they hadn’t eaten for two days. They still had three to four days of walking ahead of them before they would reach the Dempster Highway, and they needed to cross a large mountain range before reaching the heavily wooded area where the highway runs through. We shared all the food we had with us and walked with them to the first painted sign in Seela Pass.

Had they known they were paralleling the Dempster Highway, they would have realized that Chapman Lake was only 25 miles east of where we located them. Had they stayed in that valley, they would have had another 130 miles to go before encountering the Dempster Highway.

About two hours later, both helicopters arrived. They had to refuel at Chapman Lake and brought what little food we had at our camp. We fed the men the remaining food we had, and then both helicopters loaded up, and we flew directly to Dawson City. All three of them were successful businessmen from Vancouver, and I don’t believe they would be interested in any more mining ventures in the Yukon Territory for the rest of their lives.

They had not found the claims marked with pieces of the red plaid jacket, and I can attest that the vast area of the Yukon we covered during our search did not contain the claim posts. I had marked lines on my topographic map for every place we searched. Each day, I used a different colored pencil to keep track of where we had flown, with red dots marking the spots where we landed. At no time during those six long days of flying in the helicopter,we located any signs of human presence or the red plaid jacket on the claim posts. We covered a huge portion of the Ogilvie Mountains northwest of Chapman Lake, where the gold, silver, and nickel deposits were allegedly located.