We used to assist the Mining Recorder in patrolling the creeks, and he provided us with a 500-foot tape to measure the length of some of the claims. Once word got out that the police were checking the placement of claim stakes and measuring the claims, it helped keep many claimholders honest. Those with pits close to the edge of their claims were measured in, and we reported them to the Mining Recorder. They would then send people out to verify, as we had no way of knowing if they were following the “pay dirt” into a neighboring claim.

A major challenge arose for the Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP), where Forty Mile Creek crossed from Alaska into Canada. American claims were 1,000 feet long, and one person could register up to three claims. In contrast, Canadian claims were only 500 feet long, and one person could only have one claim registered, aside from the discovery claim on that water course. Many American gold seekers came to Forty Mile and practiced a form of vigilante justice before the Royal Northwest Mounted Police arrived. The police, acting as Mining Recorders, did not allow such large claims and enforced the one-claim-per-person rule unless it was the discovery claim, which upset many American miners.

The Klondike gold region spans between 750 and 1,500 square miles, with approximately 200-300 miles of creeks mined. Claims were 500 feet wide along the creek bottom and from rim rock to rim rock (the top of the banks directly opposite the creek’s flow). In areas where the creek bent, there were many fractional claims measured and recorded from the top of the bank outside the curve to the point where the last claim post was located. Claims were numbered sequentially from the discovery claim.

Once you paid your money and registered a claim, you had to complete $600 worth of improvements to keep the claim in good standing. This could involve building a cabin or sluice boxes, moving 200 yards of soil, or digging 40 feet of shaft. If you did not complete these improvements, you had to pay the government $600 each year to maintain the claim. Failure to make the payment by the registry date meant the claim was forfeited and could be re-registered by anyone.

While I was in Dawson, I had Claim number four below the discovery claim on Bonanza Creek for five years. I used it to take friends and visitors to experience gold panning. It was difficult to keep track of who the claims were registered to and to get permission to access them, especially to practice panning for placer gold. Most creeks were well-mined out, and the heavy pay areas were depleted. The only pay streak on my claim was high on the shoulder of the creek, and the access road further up the valley ran through the claim on this high shoulder.

A generous bottle of spirits helped a grader operator remove a lot of overburden, qualifying as improvements to keep my claim open. As he graded the road each year, he exposed some of the pay streak, which was only about three to five inches thick. My parking lot expanded each year. Pay dirt is an off-colored red compared to the surrounding gravel. I would let guests dig up some pay dirt, load up a pan or a couple of five-gallon buckets, and then carry it down to the creek. I demonstrated how to separate the gravel from the gold, and if they were careful, they could recover a dozen or so specks of gold. However, the 200-foot climb back up to my ever-expanding parking lot quickly wore off the novelty of gold panning. The effort of climbing up and down the embankment and working in extremely cold water, even with rubber gloves, was challenging.

The Geological Survey of Canada estimated the Klondike region to be 800 square miles. It was all within our Detachment area, extending halfway to Old Crow. Because we had a summer road that eventually became the Dempster Highway, stretching all the way to Fort McPherson in the Northwest Territories, our area extended 150 miles north, 200 miles east to the N.W.T. border, west to the Alaska border, and about 70 miles south, bordering the Mayo detachment area, which included the Stewart River. I never measured or calculated the exact number of square miles in our Detachment area. Only four members were stationed there when I was posted to Dawson City.

Due to oil exploration in the Eagle Plain area, which had winter roads maintained only during the winter, I drove to within about 40 miles of Old Crow and claimed to be the first RCMP member to drive a police car across the Arctic Circle. With aircraft and helicopter companies based in Dawson City, we had access to them for major searches or investigations in remote areas of the detachment, as well as the Air Division’s single Otter stationed in Whitehorse.

One search that stands out involved a group of three prospectors/investors who had hired a helicopter from Whitehorse and secretly went into the Ogilvie and Richardson Mountains northeast of Dawson. They filed a flight plan from Whitehorse to Dawson City and closed their flight plan with the Department of Transport (DOT) in Dawson, so there was no reason to check on their whereabouts, as we had no knowledge of their presence in our Detachment area.

Their backup was the fourth partner, still in Vancouver. When he sobered up a week or so later and realized he hadn’t heard from them, he contacted the Vancouver City Police to report them missing. Their secret “mother lode” was sketched on the back of a cigarette package, with “Chapman Lake, Yukon” written on it, and an arrow indicating the direction of the north was above the writing. The Vancouver policeman provided me with his phone number and handed him over to me.

I spoke with him, and he had no details about what the group was wearing except that they had bush clothes. When I mentioned brown camouflage, he confirmed that was their attire, and they had hats with mosquito shields. They were northeast of Dawson City, searching for silver, gold, and a big nickel deposit they intended to stake and register with the Mining Recorder in Dawson City. He sounded knowledgeable about prospecting and seemed legitimate.

He recounted that, during a visit to Dawson City, he had hired a local Native and his son to take him by boat to Forty Mile. They had then packed his camp and supplies about forty miles east into the Ogilvie Mountains. He had prospected the area a few years earlier but hadn’t gone to the exact location of the minerals with the Natives. When he returned to Dawson in the fall, he had been drinking and lacked the funds to register the claims. He had left twelve pictures of the claims, showing the extent of the deposit. He had spent time trying to find partners and ended up in Vancouver.

The group tested their samples, assayed them, and planned a partnership. Given that most helicopters only held three passengers, he decided to wait in Vancouver. He said they flew to Whitehorse and intended to use a helicopter from there to the described location. He had staked the claims and left parts of his red plaid shirt on the claim posts. He had only pointed out the location on a road map of the Yukon and gave me the names of his partners.

I checked with the airline, which confirmed that the group had flown from Vancouver to Whitehorse, but no passengers by those names had flown since. I also verified with the local Department of Transport office when the flight plan was closed and assumed the helicopter was still at the airport, which was five miles from town.

This was before the Internet era, so I knew Chapman Lake was located about 150 miles from Dawson City, at the end of the gravel Dempster Highway. To get there, you had to travel south on Highway #2 for forty miles, then turn north on Highway #5 (the Dempster Highway), and head almost true north for about seventy-five miles.

We hired a local helicopter, and I arranged for fuel to be driven to an elevated cache I had built the previous year for an anticipated dogsled trip from Dawson City to Fort McPherson. If we needed more fuel, a note would be left on the signboard at the cache, and an envelope would be dropped off at the detachment reporting our flights and search areas.

I took a big tent, a stove, cots, sleeping bags, and cooking equipment, and another member dropped me off in our station wagon police car. We had no radio contact with Dawson City, as the police radio was only effective within about ten miles, and the Department of Transport radio was of little use in the mountains. It was not until the third day that we located their fuel cache of empty ten-gallon barrels and their four small tents. There were signs that they had been collecting rock samples. The next day, we found the helicopter in a deep valley about 80 miles from their camp in the mountains.

I checked the fuel tanks, which were empty, indicating they had either run out of fuel and set the helicopter down or used the last of the fuel to start signal fires. There were signs of three large signal fires made with green branches and spruce piles, which would have created a lot of smoke. The ashes were cold, suggesting the fires had been out for several days. The pilot checked the helicopter, and the key was still in the off position. The emergency crash beacon was intact and not activated, so no aerial search had been initiated using that signal. There were signs that they had caught, cooked, and eaten a lot of grayling, as evidenced by fish bones found by the fire.

We had to return to Chapman Lake for fuel, and with the perpetual daylight, the pilot needed some rest daily. The following day, we took off with all the fuel we could carry, using the location of the other helicopter as our outer base station, and continued our search from that point. We followed the creek to where it emerged from the side of a mountain. He dropped me off, and I crossed the depression, looking in the moss for any signs of four people walking. Next, we searched in the other direction; when he found a landing spot, I checked across the many game trails for tracks. We could not determine how they had left the valley where the helicopter was located.

We then flew to the tops of the surrounding mountains where the helicopter could land, and we scanned in every direction. I had binoculars and a telescope for long-distance viewing if we spotted anything suspicious. The weather remained clear and sunny, with temperatures in the high 70s to early 80s Fahrenheit and only the occasional scattered rainstorm in some valleys. I continued to fire my service revolver in three-shot bursts and listened for any response from any direction.

The area was crisscrossed with endless game trails, and there were around 50,000 caribou summering in the Eagle Plain area. We made numerous stops to check for boot tracks whenever we encountered wet areas on the game trails. Typically, the pilot would land the helicopter half a mile from the game trails and shut it down to conserve fuel. After several miles in heavy tangle-foot brush, I was becoming exhausted. The stunted spruce trees grew up to the "Tree Line," around the 6,000-foot level, consistent worldwide. Above this line, trees become smaller and more sparse.

The mountains in that area vary in height from 7,000 to 8,000 feet, with the valley floor approximately 2,000 feet, and the mountain passes mostly around 3,000 feet above sea level. Some mountain ranges extend 20 to 30 miles, with prominent peaks and rugged rock shoulders above the tree line. Photos of Tombstone Territorial Park, where people have admired the grandeur of the area, are now widely available on the Internet.

Caribou migration trails meander rather than follow a straight path as they feed briefly on leaves and lichens before moving to the next likely mouthful. This results in the meandering pattern of the trails, which can be a foot deep. In fall, the caribou use these well-worn trails to migrate west to the Richardson and Ogilvie Mountains from Alaska. In spring, they return to Alaska, where they feed on tundra and drop their calves. During their migration, they avoid wolves, which prey on smaller animals like rabbits, mice, marmots, ptarmigan, deer, moose, elk, buffalo, and muskox.

Some valleys have up to fifty game trails crisscrossing them, used for moving between valleys. These trails, used for thousands of years, are hard-packed and about a foot wide. Whenever there was dense spruce growth in a valley, we would fly around it and land, then fire three signal shots into the air and conduct a "hoot and holler" search.

After ordering a second and third load of fuel, the pilot decided we needed to return to Dawson and involve more people in the search. He was likely frustrated with flying long hours daily, totaling about ten to twelve hours some days. Despite our efforts, we had not found any signs or tracks of the four individuals since they had left their helicopter. My topographic maps were covered with the routes we had flown, and all landing points were marked with colored dots.

I directed the pilot towards Seela Pass, which leads through the mountains directly toward Dawson City. Seela Pass is on the continental divide, separating waters flowing west into the Yukon River watershed and eventually into the Bering Strait from those flowing east into the Mackenzie River and then north into the Beaufort Sea.

 

I wanted to show him Tombstone Mountain, which I had climbed earlier in the summer with a companion from Dawson. The oil company had flown in fluorescent-painted sheets of ¾-inch plywood using a large helicopter and dropped them in a straight line at intervals they estimated to be 500 feet apart. I had been dropped off to erect them, ensuring they were exactly in a straight line, with the fluorescent faces oriented to minimize snow collection. These markers were set up to help aircraft navigate the pass safely in poor visibility.

As we rounded the base of a mountain on the way to the pass, we spotted the four individuals frantically waving. We landed and greeted the very tired, hungry hikers. We shared the food we had with us and decided to rescue their downed helicopter. They could then use our fuel cache to fly the helicopter out.

The pilot flew back to their helicopter with a load of fuel while I told him we would meet him at the first fluorescent sign in the pass, about two miles away, where we were on a solid, wide game trail. Chapman Lake was about 25-30 miles from where we found them and about 75 miles from Dawson City.

The hikers had compasses and stayed in the mountains to avoid the dense spruce in the valleys to the west. They knew that the Dempster Highway ran northeast from Dawson City, so if they continued southerly, they would eventually intersect with the Dempster Highway.

From where we located them to their helicopter was over 100 miles, and they had been walking for ten days. We had searched for six days and accumulated 81 hours in the air (according to the invoice). The pilot had only a small .22 caliber survival rifle, which he used to kill ptarmiganand rabbits and shoot graylings from creeks and small lakes. All the caribou they encountered had spooked and kept their distance, and they hadn’t eaten for two days. They still had three to four days of walking ahead to reach the Dempster Highway and a big range of mountains before reaching the heavily wooded area through which the highway runs.

We shared all the remaining food with them and walked to the first painted sign in Seela Pass. If they had known they were paralleling the Dempster Highway and Chapman Lake was only 25 miles east of where we found them, they could have avoided another 130 miles of travel.

About two hours later, both helicopters arrived. They needed to refuel at Chapman Lake and brought the remaining food from our camp. We fed the hikers with what was left and then flew directly to Dawson City. All three were successful businessmen from Vancouver, and I don’t believe they would be interested in any more mining ventures in the Yukon Territory for the rest of their lives.