Looking into the history of the hundreds of shipwrecks around the coast of Newfoundland and Labrador, we managed to take a picture of the map compiled up to 1903. We were at the museum, and the curator briefly displayed the map. I was brushing my hair with my “Minox – Sesler” spy camera, and it happened to go off. After processing the film, we had every location, date, and name of the ship that hit the rocks and was recorded. In questioning whether to mention the viewing of the map, I checked on the Internet, and it is fully displayed there for everyone to now view the repeated disasters recorded up until 1903. We got the names and dates of the wrecks and sent a text out to Lloyds of London Insurance on a lot of them, mostly on the Avalon Peninsula, to see if they were insured by them and to question whether they were inbound or outbound. If they were outbound, they would likely be filled with cod and would not have any or little money on board.

It was a habit of the Newfoundlanders to hang a light on their horses and cows overnight, and the sailing ships would head for the light. There is no reverse in a sailing ship, and the Newfoundlanders only had to gather up the spoils and booty along the shore. Our gathering of marine specimens, assisting the Marine Biology Section of Memorial University, was focused on those locations for a couple of years. Then, a big discovery was made off Nova Scotia with a lot of treasure, and the Newfoundland Government enacted the Historical Artifacts Act with a $15,000 fine associated with it. Our focus for collecting specimens was directed elsewhere after looking at the enactment. It was obvious that they were interested in stopping any treasure hunters from looking in their waters.

Researching some history, it seems in the 16th and 17th centuries, Queen Elizabeth I gave permission for Peter Easton to act as a privateer to protect the British interest in the fishery on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland. It was understood that over time, he collected a fleet of 40 ships to protect their interests in Newfoundland and Labrador. In 1602, he built a fort at Harbour Grace in Conception Bay and worked the eastern seaboard, capturing and removing anything of value and capturing any ship that did not fly the British flag.

Peter Easton (1570 – 1620 or after) was an English privateer and later pirate in the early 17th century. Conflicting accounts exist regarding his early life. By 1602, Easton had become a highly successful privateer, commissioned to protect English interests in Newfoundland waters. On 23 June 1604, after Elizabeth I was succeeded by James I, the king sued for peace with Spain and canceled all letters of commission to privateers. On hearing the news, Easton continued his attack on vessels as though nothing had changed. In so doing, he had crossed the line into piracy. He then moved to the Caribbean, where the spoils were more generous as the Spanish were robbing the treasures of Central and South America.

Local rumor was that his ship or one of his ships had been sunk right in the harbor of Ferryland, which was one of the harbors that he moved to be closer to the eastern seaboard of Newfoundland. I had another investigation in the area and talked it over with some of the locals, and they pointed out exactly where the vessel went down. The folklore had been handed down from generation to generation. The story was that they had captured one of the Portuguese vessels and brought it into the harbor at Ferryland to transfer the cargo. The ship had a lot of wine on board, and when they were transferring the booty over to the pirate ship, the crew had been over-sampling a lot of the Portuguese wine and somehow upset one of the lamps, and the boat caught on fire. In their drunken stupor to put out the fire, they opened the sea cocks, figuring that it was anchored close to shore so it would put the fire out and the ship would be saved. Unfortunately, the water was 80 feet deep where it was anchored, and the pirate vessel sunk to the bottom. Easton and his crew then sailed off in the Portuguese vessel, and the Portuguese sailors were left in the fishing village of Ferryland.

With SCUBA gear, we had been recovering and restoring a lot of cod trap anchors, and we called in favor of one of the fishermen at Quidi-Vidi to take our diving crew from St. John’s to Ferryland, a distance of about 50 miles in his big skiff. We had no trouble locating the wreck when we got into the water, as the captain had anchored directly above the remains. It was a pile of rotten planks strewn over about a two-hundred-foot area that was easily moved as the calcareous algae had not cemented it all together so we could get to the cargo area without difficulty. We found groupings of small cannonballs that were obviously used as shrapnel; they produced holes in the sails of the pursued boat they were overtaking and also would have injured a lot of the crew.

There were hundreds of bottles of wine that proved to be vinegar upon our sampling. I found the rusty part of a sextant and a brass-bound box. When I got it open, it contained a loaded pistol with a flared end on the barrel that had three notches in the forestock and silver filigree on the forestock, as well as the lead ball-making pliers and the captain’s clay pipe. Some of the wood on the pistol had rotted out, and I sanded the wood, saved the sawdust, and filled the area in with glue and the wood dust. I brushed off the light rust that was on the metal parts, drilled the charge out of the barrel, polished all the metal parts, and restored it to its original condition.

There were an endless number of brass spikes in and around the wreck, and most of them were still in some of the chunks of wood. The brass box did not deteriorate in the salt water, and there was no exchange of water within the small box, protecting the contents. I found the remaining brass flares that had been on other small wooden boxes that had deteriorated along with their contents. The ship had lead sheeting on the bottom of the boat, and the entire outline of the ship was set out on the bottom as the lead had not deteriorated. We recovered a lot of the brass spikes that were loose in the rotted wood and timbers, and they were mostly turned over to the maritime museum, as well as the stock of wine bottles and other artifacts.

We had exhausted our time down at 80 feet and had to terminate our dive period for the day, so we headed back to St. John’s. It was a nice sunny day, and we had laid out the little cannonballs all over the deck on both sides of the vessel to let them dry. On the way home, some of them began to smoke, so spontaneous combustion was likely happening, and we decided it was best to throw them overboard before they exploded. There was a mad scramble to find them all and throw them into the ocean. We turned some of the bigger pieces of lead sheeting over to the museum, the bottles of wine, a lot of brass spikes, and dozens of clay pipes.

When I got back to the barracks and was washing my diving gear in fresh water, I found one of the small cannonballs that had rolled down the deck and was in the shade of my wet diving gear. I very quickly took it out and put it on the top of an ant hill a couple of hundred yards away from the buildings and in the trees. I checked on it a couple of weeks later, and it had not exploded. Sixty-three years later, I still have it in my collection of goodies.

When I show the pistol to anyone and tell them that it is a pirate’s pistol, they figure I am really stringing them along. When I point out the three notches in the forestock, I don’t know if they signify ships or men. It is hard to make them a believer, but that is the background of those pictures.

  

 

Scuba Diving –(Self Contained Breathing Apparatus)



When we were growing up in Ontario, we learned to swim in the North River about two miles from our home. My grandfather’s farm was on the north side of the river, and we used to swim a couple of miles up and down the river in the summer.At home, in the North River, I referred to the water as being “Pasturized” because it drained every pasture in the country as the water was a light brown color.It had to be fairly safe as I cannot ever recall anybody being sick or catching anything from swimming in the river, but the visibility was about a foot.

I first started using SKUBA when a buddy rented a system, and I drove him south of Tobermory on the Bruce Peninsula on the west side of the Georgian Bay.The shoreline is limestone and the water is crystal clear as the peninsula sticks out between the Georgian Bay and Lake Huron some 60 miles.You had the sensation and fear of falling when you were swimming along with a mask and goggles and being able to see fish 30 feet down as the water was so clear they seemed to be suspended.

We spent almost every weekend for two summers diving in that area, and there were several sunken boats along that shoreline to be invested in.Both of us purchased better and better equipment and wet suits to extend our season when the water cooled in the fall.We took lessons on the use of the gear at theY.M.C.A. in Orillia, and I received the Bonze Medallion and Award of Merit from the St. John Ambulance Society.We ended up sharing the price of a compressor with a few others to fill our tanks.

I joined the Royal Canadian Mounted Police on the 9th of February, 1961, and headed off to the “Depot” Division in Regina, Saskatchewan, for training.I excelled at swimming, and during the first swimming period, we were divided into swimmers and none swimmers. Then you went up onto the high diving board and went with a nonswimmer on your back and jumped from there into the water.I had my instructions on how to deal with a frightened individual in the water and quickly brought him to the edge of the pool.The instructor questioned where I learned how to do that, and I told him the YMCA and that as part of their instructions for their award of Merit and Bronze Medallion from the St. Johns Lifesaving Society.After that, I was given my troop members to instruct them on swimming after hours, and it meant that I was going to the pool every night for weeks.

When we were just about finished training, we were given an option of where we would like to be posted first.I chose Alberta, and the second choice was British Columbia.I guess they thought that I wanted a maritime climate, so I got posted to St. John’s, Newfoundland/Labrador.On my way through Ontario, I visited my family and picked up my SCUBA gear and a few of my rifles.

In the first week, I was in St. John’s, I met a chap who was also a scuba diver. He was with the Canadian Army Military Intelligence Corp and was also an avid diver and was working on his degree in Marine Biology in his off time at Memorial University.He showed me some of the pictures he produced with a pen dot process that was going to be part of this thesis and had the names on every one of them.It was a whole new world for me and we went diving together on the first weekend that I had off.I had brought up a round, spiny creature, and I was showing him the object sitting on my right hand and thumb and watching the sharp spins moving slightly.He was shouted a warning that those urchins could really bite.At that moment, it had a hold of the edge of my hand and continued to close its five teeth on the edge of my hand.It continued to close it’s teeth until it had taken out the whole chunk of my hand about 3/8th of an inch across.I still have ascar on the base of my first finger.Here, I was trying to stop the bleeding, and he wanted to take it to the tanks at the University because that was the largest Urchin that he had ever seen.

He had a “shore crew” with him that included the whole family of one of the Army base cooks. When we were about to go for another dive, he had a short piece of a broomstick, and I accompanied him. When we went down to about 50 feet, he began poking in a depression under a big rock, and when he brought the broomstick out, he had a huge lobster with its fighting claw clamped onto the end of the broomstick. He then grabbed onto the fighting claw and then the crushing claw, and we headed up and onto the beach. One of the beach crew took the lobster and walked it over to a big cauldron of seawater bubbling on the campfire. Before they dropped it in the pot, Jim had him hold the 20-pound lobster up and put the broomstick in the crushing claw, and it snapped it into two pieces instantly. I got my first lesson on the dangers of big lobsters when he allowed it to grab the broomstick in the crushing claw and it snapped the broomstick end right off. It next hit the boiling water, and fifteen minutes later, I had my first taste of lobster and a heck of a first outing.

We continued to attract SCUBA divers and decided to form the Services Diving Club, which involved the Army, Navy, Air Force, and RCMP. Later on, we allowed the Memorial University students to join who were enrolled in the Marine Biology section. We then figured that we should get insurance, and they insisted that we had to have a certified instructor. I was chosen to go to New York and get the training on the PADI Open Water Diver certification and also became an instructor in managing your buoyancy and a Master SCUBA Diver Trainer.

Bell Island Vehicle Accident

They had a chap in his hopped-up vehicle burning circles in the meadow by a drunken party around the fire on Bell Island. It was a drunken party held at the edge of a 150-foot cliff, and he came out of one of the circles, and the taillights were last seen going over the cliff and into the sea. My equipment and services as a SCUBA diver were requested. I drove the big 16-passenger van to Portugal Cove and headed across on the ferry to the island.

Bell Island is located inthe middle of Conception Bay and is the site of the largest and richest iron mines in the world. The shaft of the mine goes down in the middle of the island, and then shafts run out under the sea for miles. There were huge fans at the top of the island that provided pressure to keep the water from seeping into the miles of shafts and flooding them. The ore is then loaded onto boats and shipped to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and Germany.

Arriving at the ferry terminal, the Sgt had a boat and directed one of the members to go up on the meadow and locate the tracks where the car went over the cliff and waved a flag so we would have some idea from the sea where the vehicle went over the cliff. He had one of the trap boats hired, with plenty of room to don my wetsuit and gear. When the member arrived at the cliff top, we anchored where there was an oil sheen on the surface of the water. A long crack in the basalt cliff led straight down from where the member appeared, and it was several hundred feet away from the oil slick. We figured possibly a current along the cliff face had moved the oil slick off from where the member stood at the top. He anchored the boat about 100 feet off the cliff, and the member said the tracks led straight back from where he was standing. The captain of the trap skiff said he thought there was at least 100 feet of anchor chain that he had let out.

I directed him to follow the bubbles that appear on the surface, and I would appreciate it if he would be close to the bubble path. I was first going to check right at the base of the cliff and then go down from there. I was taking a security line with me as I was diving alone, which was not the recommended procedure, but everyone in the club was tied up or working.

We worked out a signal system: two jerks to give me more line, and he was to give one jerk if he got the message. If I gave three jerks, he was to secure the line on the boat as I would be following the line up to the boat and would have a line back down to where I had secured it.

As I was diving alone, I had a small nylon rope clipped to my weight belt as a safety precaution. We went through the routine of what different jerks on the rope meant and ensured that the boat captain had a handle on our signal messages. I put my wetsuit on, as well as tanks and mask, and went into the water backwards, and swam over to the cliff face on the surface. I saw that the rock face continued down and then encountered a rubble of big rocks about 20 feet below the surface, and the broken rocks continually sloped down at about a 45-degree angle.

I encountered the dark red Pontiac lying on its roof on the slope with the rear of the vehicle up towards the surface. The driver’s window was down, and I could not feel if the driver was in the driver's position or the passenger seat of the vehicle. The sun was not on the water as the area was in the shadow of the cliff, and visibility was about three to four feet. I took the clip off my weight belt, put the rope around the steering wheel, and then clipped it back onto the weight belt so that I would have a direct line going back to the vehicle. I signaled for more lines to be let out and headed to the surface. Considering that I was at 100 feet, I decided to go to the surface, advise them of my findings, and deal with decompression.

To deal with decompression, you allow a breath of air out while you are vertical, pick the smallest bubble, keep it in the face mask, and keep pace with it as it rises all the way to the surface. I had only been a few minutes at this depth, and it was just a precaution used to prevent nitrogen build-up in your blood. You just breathe normally, and it prevents the “bends” and theneed for a session in the decompression chamber. I was at 100 feet of water and slowly headed to the surface.

I got into the boat and briefed the Sgt on my initial findings, saying that I thought there was a chance that the driver might have exited the vehicle. I decided that I would return to the surface and keep them abreast of my findings. I told them that the visibility was poor, but I would take a flashlight down and check the vehicle thoroughly. I suggested that trying to do a dragging operation on such a rocky, steep slope with such large rocks and at that depth would not be possible or likely to be successful. With the cold seawater, the bloating of the body would take weeks, and a search with SCUBA at that depth was not possible because of the decompression issue, which limited the time at that depth to 10 to 15 minutes.

I had my service flashlight in my diving bag and big plastic bags, so I put the flashlight in the plastic bag and tied a big knot in the plastic bag. I had a direct line to the vehicle and I wanted the Sgt. to recover the slack in the line as I went back down to the vehicle. I told the captain that there was a hitch on the rear of the vehicle and that if he wished, I could take a line down and run it through the frame on the hitch. He said he had a thousand feet of half-inch line in the bottom of the boat, and if I brought the end back up to the boat instead of tying it on, they could have four to five lengths of the line down through the hitch to lift it and to tow it back to the beach by the landing as the family owned a garage on the island and would be able to fix it.

I got back in the water and followed my small cord back down to the vehicle with the captain’s line in one hand. Initial use of the flashlight helped confirm the subject was not in the front seat area, and after a cursory search from the open window, I could not see the body in the rear area. I reached into the window with the flashlight in my left hand and looked through the window, and I could see that he was mostly down on the floor in front of the seat, lying on his back.

Getting the rear passenger door open was not possible on that side because it was resting against a rock about halfway up the door. I then headed to the other side of the vehicle. I fished the line underneath the bracket holding the tow bar. As I swam past the trunk and decided to hit the button that held the trunk shut, it opened violently, and two spare tires came out and headed for the surface. I was able to get the rear door partly open and got the body out with some difficulty as rigor mortis had set in, and his legs and arms were stiff, and the rear door would not open all the way. I tied the loose end of the small rope onto the body that I had used as a security line, as well as the loose end of the rope, and knotted it well around the subject. I then passed the end of the half-inch line into the frame of the trailer hitch and tied it around the subject, and we slowly made our way back to the surface. Getting the body into the boat, I passed them the portion of the rope, and they lifted him into the boat. I passed my tanks into the boat and wrapped the rope around under my shoulders, and they lifted me over the side of the boat with ease.

They wrapped the body in canvas, and we headed for the mainland and my vehicle at Portugal Cove. The body would have to be examined by the Coroner, so I took the Sgt. and the body to the Coroner’s office in St. John’s and then returned him to the ferry terminal at Portugal Cove.

The Sgt. forwarded a glowing report of the successful body recovery, which resulted in me having to submit a report on my total involvement in the body recovery, and the Force decided that SCUBA diving was not a safe sport and that I would have to submit an individual report on each and every time I went diving, and it had to be signed by my dive partner for each and every dive that I went on. This was a great inconvenience because some days, we had two and sometimes three dives at different places at different depths. But in compliance with the directive, I had a record of over three hundred hours at or below 60 feet of water during the rest of my service using SCUBA.

Jim McCullough became my constant dive partner, and we were diving in Conception Bay on one open-water dive. As we were coming back to shore, we saw a bunch of flatfish circle around a great number of baited hooks lying on the sandy bottom as we headed to shore. As we got out on the beach, we found a University student with an endless number of fishing rods set up along the beach.

We talked with him, and he was doing his thesis on the inner ear bone of a flatfish. Jim asked him how many he had studied, and he had based his work to date on only five flatfish. He was asked how many he thought he should have, and he figured he had hoped to base his study on 100 flatfish. He said he had ten big tubs but had only caught one flatfish that week and only one that day. Jim said for him to get his tubs partially filled with water, and we would get him his quota in a few minutes.

We had built what we called “shark sticks,” which were a stainless steel sharpened rod about 18 inches long and a quarter of an inch in diameter and were tucked under our weight belt as our usual protection. There is fish being processed in every community, and the affluence from the fish is discarded into the sea, resulting in a greater number of sharks in the area of all varieties. We had these in Jim’s VW van when we doffed our tanks and weight belt before walking up to visit our fisherman.

We went back into the water and began stabbing all these flatfish around his baits. When we had 125 in the tanks, he was having trouble keeping them in his tanks, and he headed out for the University. He was in possession of fish of every size and age so he could get a good cross-section to show the difference in growth and structure.