We were asked if we could retrieve a number of cod trap anchors in some deep water, and the people making the request figured it was about 80 feet of water. We prepared several float-attached parachute cords that we could loop through the anchor rings, and they could then drag a heavy rope down and back up, giving them two lines to lift and recover the anchor. Most of the anchors were just big blocks of poured cement with a big loop of steel embedded in the cement. The shoreline was limestone, and the fisherman’s skiff took us to the location that was supposed to have a number of abandoned anchors. As they used the same sites year after year and kept using the same anchor points for their “trap” and left the ropes attached year after year, the ropes deteriorated with time, and the float that suspended the ropes floated off, and the deteriorated rope sank to the bottom.

I should put together a word description of the “trap” for all those not being Newfoundlanders or involved in the commercial fishing industry. They run a line of the net from the shore out several hundred feet, and then there is a four-sided square of the net with a bottom that is suspended out using these anchor points with floats along the top and lead sinkers holding the net downward. The shoreline net goes inside the box of the net on the shoreside of the net, possibly ten to fifteen feet. Sometimes, one side is attached to the box opening. The salmon and cod normally go up the shore, feeding into the current,run into the shoreline net, swim into the open side of the box of the net, and continue to circle inside the net. Usually, the fishermen attend the net each day and then begin lifting the net near the opening shore side of the net and continue to raise the box of the net until they are able to scoop the captured fish into the trap skiff and then let it back down to continue the fish capture. The fishermen develop a lot of upper body and arm strength from a lifetime of hauling the net up to the boat in cold water. The deterioration of one line results in the site being unusable, and to build new anchors, load them into a boat, lift them off the trap skiff, and place them in the right location is a month of work and a pile of resources, so our refurbishing the trap side is a great help to the fishermen.

As we had a boat above us, Jim’s daughter accompanied us on that dive. When we entered the water, I was really surprised bythe clarity of the water. You had the sensation that you were going to fall, as the water was crystal clear, and all you could see was the jumble of rocks way below you. Their idea of 80 feet of water proved to be 100 to 110 feet by our depth gauges. After locating three of the anchors and attaching our floats, Jim’s daughter indicated that she was getting cold, and we watched as she slowly made her way to the surface. We could clearly see her give a big wave near the boat, and we compared our depth gauges and were surprised that we were at 110 feet and could clearly see her swim to the boat and be hoisted aboard. We had wet suits on, and the bubbles in the rubber foam began to reduce in size from the increased water pressure as wewentdeeper, and the insulation factor was reduced considerably. The thermos of really warm water that we usually pour down the neck of the wetsuit extends the comfort time of the dive.

We located one more anchor and attached the float mechanism and the circle of a small rope. I noted the time down and motioned that we should head to the surface as our time at that depth had ended to prevent the possibility of contacting the dreaded “bends.” To prevent it from happening, you had calculated the time at that depth and not exceed that time, and then it was a simple task of expelling a breath of air and then locating the smallest bubble of air and keeping it in front of your face mask and breathing normally as you went up slowly following that small bubble of air. The “bends” is caused by the nitrogen collecting in your blood, and the really tiny veins in your joints all over your body will not pass through the small veins that go through the vessels that service joints in your body and cause a great deal of pain and discomfort at joints all over your body and could be fatal if a decompression chamber was not immediately available. Knowing that there was not one available in Newfoundland and the nearest one was at the Navy’s headquarters in Halifax, Nova Scotia, we could not afford to take a chance to stay at that depth over our calculated period of time.

It was a great experience to have such clear water when the clearest was that we usually dove in was just about fifty-foot visibility, and knowing that we made four anchors available for another fisherman’s cod trap in the immediate area, it was considered a great success. We managed to collect some of the calciferous algae that werebright pink in color for the Memorial University Marine Biology Section. It is normally grey to white. It forms on everything on the ocean bottom where there is fairly little current, cements everything together, and grows on the rocks, and in a few years, it builds on everything that does not move on the bottom of the ocean. I have encountered it in the Atlantic, Arctic, Pacific, and the Gulf of Mexico, where I have had the pleasure of diving.

With the Force figuring that SCUBA diving was not a safe sport or hobby, they mandated that I submit a report on each and every dive and had my dive partner sign the report. It resulted in me having a very accurate and complete list of my dives in the three years that I was stationed in Newfoundland. My dive partner was working on his degree in Marine Biology, so he knew the names of everything we encountered.And we carried chalkboards so I could draw what I saw, and he would be able to name it after the dive. He was drawing the different invertebrates with a pen dot process to make a picture. I suggested that we try taking pictures, and he said it would cost thousands of dollars to get an underwater camera. I bought a ten-dollar camera from the local junk store, sealed it in a clear plastic bag, and on the next dive, I produced a whole roll of black and white pictures of fish and interesting underwater items. We bought more and more cheap cameras and managed to keep the salt water out at deeper and deeper dives.

The water absorbs the different frequencies of light, so at about the ten-foot level, most everything is grey or black, so we needed to produce light at levels below that point. I started working on gluing plexiglass boxes for a camera, and it only had the shutter release and film advance features to control the camera.We initially used aplastic bag around a flashlight for our light source. That led to larger, thicker plexiglass enclosures, a flash that stayed at the ready for the duration of the dive, and a camera that advanced the film itself after the shutter release. With endless pictures of fish in the mating colors, he had no trouble getting his degree in Marine Biology. We were doing some diving in shallow caves and discovered the “Red Sea Cucumbers down at about the thirty-foot level were fluorescing red when they detected our presence, and that should not be happening, and that was part of his submission for his degree. I have about 1500 underwater pictures, and when color photography became reasonably priced, most of them were in color. Up until that point, we processed our black and white film in a very rudimentary dark room facility until I befriended the N.C.O. in charge of the RCMP Identification Section and started volunteering to help him,as the second member was supposed to come in from Ottawa and he developed all sorts of maladies to prevent the transfer to Newfoundland.

I managed to identify a set of prints of an armed robbery suspect and put one of the bad dudes out of commission with free room and board for six months. I got some good court time introducing photographs and scenes of crime that I presented. He then allowed me to help out with photography and scenes of crime drawings to assist him, and I did a lot of work for him in the darkroom, which gave me access to the chemicals. I only had to purchase the paper for developing any of my black-and-white prints, as the chemicals had to be replaced daily, and the odd roll of my film wasdeveloped. He took advantage of sending me out to crime scenes when he was attending to the more serious ones. He was the only identification member serving the entire island and was extremely busy, so my limited help was really appreciated.

He had taken all of the members’ individual photographs that were forwarded with our annual assessment. I used color paints and colored up a copy of my photograph, which went forward to Ottawa. Somebody in Ottawa suggested that all of the photographs be colored, which was quickly shot down by the N.C.O., advising them that it took about five hours to color that photograph and it was done by the member himself and would not be possible without his lab being equipped to print color photographs. It was not long after that when the lab began printing color photographs, and the colored photograph industry changed to color. I have included a copy of the hand-painted print as the cover of the book. It was in my free time that I helped out in the Identification Section, and he encouraged me to join the section. I told him that I had no wish to become a full-time Identification Section member, as I had already applied to go North to the “G” Division and would have to get the Identification training and certification in Ottawa, which did not appeal to me at all.

I had two trips to Ottawa when I was in Newfoundland. The Force had considered taking the FN .308 semi-automatic rifles from the military and spent two weeks disassembling and assembling them, even in the dark, as well as shooting both the C1 (semi-automatic) and the C2 model that was fully automatic on the range. I suggested that the Force not consider taking on such a complicated firearm for endless reasons. The second trip was to get certified to operate a motorcycle. Our week of running a bike in a newly plowed field for eight hours was not the most pleasant experience when I already had possibly 25,000 kilometers on two wheels prior to joining the Force. All I learned was that you could get saddle sores, and you had to dig holes for both wheels to get the big bikes upright by yourself if they went down. It seemed that throughout my service there was always a bike available, and I was detailed to ride for doing enforcement and escorting diplomats or the Queen and Prince Philip on their visits to Canada. When in Newfoundland and doing enforcement on a bike, there was no windshield, and we had a big rubber raincoat that ensured all the rain was directed to your crotch. You were detailed to ten-hour shifts, and rain was a usual occurrence sometime during your shift. The other inconvenience was the round gravel that washed out onto the pavement from every laneway. If you did not hit it going perfectly straight, you could be assured that the bike was going down from underneath you, and doing that a couple of times a shift was not much fun.