When I was seventeen years of age, they were building the extension of Highway 400 in southern Ontario, which became Highway 69 up to Sudbury. The area at the end of the farmland is part of the Precambrian Shield and features huge granite rock formations. They had to do a lot of dynamiting to blast through these rock formations to build the highway. The highway was bending back and forth to avoid the larger formations, sometimes taking the side off some of them and, in other places, going straight through them. They did a line of small drill holes close together to set out the alignment of the roadway. In the center of these rock cuts, they used six-inch sticks of dynamite that were over a foot long, which had to be lowered into the holes. For the inch-and-a-quarter holes, the stick was dropped in, and the air replacement slowed the stick from going down the hole and cushioned the drop safely.

The unfortunate part of the larger sticks was that the smell of nitroglycerine caused most people to get splitting headaches, and they couldn’t stand loading more than one or two holes before quitting. I used a big truck inner tube that I cut flat, put a slit down the middle, and placed over the hole with the slit over the strings of the clasper that held the big sticks. This dispersed the noxious gases downwind and away from the powder monkey (namely me). I did the first rock cut in record time as the other two walked off with headaches, and the engineer figured it would have taken three people and gave me the wages of the other two. Then, I was off until the next rock cut was ready to be loaded. This continued for the entire length of Highway 69 all the way to Sudbury, and I was given a Powder Monkey certificate that allowed me to purchase dynamite from any outlet. In my off time, I dug a well at home using dynamite to blow the hard pan out of the hole; by how much of the stick I used in the hole, I punched a hole in the center with a big bar. I also did a lot of blowing out stumps and big rocks for farmers around the neighborhood. I attended a course in Nobel, Ontario, where dynamite is manufactured, and learned about the different strengths by the percentages of nitroglycerine it contains.

In the early spring of 1965, I was advised that I would be taking over policing at Carcross Detachment area, which is located south of Whitehorse, some 78 miles away, and off the Alaska Highway about 35 miles. The Tagish Road goes west from Jake’s Corner, crosses over the 1800-foot wooden bridge over the Tagish River, and then 24 miles to Carcross. From there, the road goes north towards Whitehorse, some 78 miles. I was to drop in at Whitehorse to make arrangements to pick up office supplies and the police car. Here I was taking on running my own detachment and having to learn all of the administration of running my own detachment with just four years of service, so there was a real steep learning curve with the monthly reports and returns.

The Force rented a vertical log cabin that had the office in what used to be the living room, with two bedrooms down a long hallway and the kitchen at the very back with a big wood-burning stove, a back door, and a pathway to the building with a half-moon doorway. There was an oil-burning heater on one side of the office area and the front door with windows on either side of the doorway with a slight overhang. The chap who owned the hardware store and hotel with a coffee shop and restaurant also owned a number of buildings stocked with endless merchandise. His father had started the hardware business in the 1900s and had stocked a couple of warehouses with endless products. The gold seekers did not stop in Carcross to shop, and if they came by train, they went on to Whitehorse to buy anything they needed. On my first few days in my new facilities, we had a major storm for three days and very high winds. The dust and sand blew through the cracks between the vertical logs, and there were thin lines of dust all along the west wall of the building. I went to the owner of the building, and he supplied me with rolls of thin vinyl flooring material that I nailed and stapled on the three walls of the office, the two bedrooms, and the kitchen on the west side, as the winds always came up the Bennett Lake and across the sand dunes. Carcross is known to have the “Smallest Desert in the World,” and I can attest to it having the finest sand and dust.

I found that I had to drive almost 40 miles out of the settlement to a high hill on the roadway north before I could make radio contact with the Whitehorse Detachment. I hauled the 26-foot freighter canoe with an 18 HP outboard motor down from Whitehorse, which was to be my detachment watercraft. I had to haul the fuel that I thought I would need as there was no service station in Carcross, and the nearest gas station was at Jake’s Corner, thirty-five miles east on the Tagish Road out on the Alaska Highway. I made another trip to pick up my powerboat with a 35 HP outboard motor and left my Rambler station wagon in the compound in Whitehorse.

The White Pass & Yukon Route Railway has a train that runs from Skagway, Alaska, to Whitehorse and comes up on the east side of Bennett Lake, crosses the Taku Arm with a bridge, and has a train station in Carcross. The railway maintenance crew lived in barracks in Carcross and were all single men who frequented the bar in the hotel.

There was an Indian Residential School run by the Anglican Church, and their maintenance man was building himself a steam-powered boat in his off hours. On the third day, I was there, I was down at the river to help him launch his boat. I had put my own boat in the water and used my trailer to haul his boat from the school to the launch area. I had built the boat when I was in Newfoundland and had hauled the boat and trailer the 6,997 miles from St. John’s to Dawson City the previous year with only one flat tire going over the bridge in Montreal. I watched him go down the Taku Arm with my spotting scope and binoculars, and when he encountered the waves in Windy Arm, I saw him begin to turn around. In doing so, a wave came over the side and put out the fire under his boiler, and there was no more smoke coming out of the smokestack, just a big cloud of steam. I launched my powerboat and got to him before the boat went into the rocks on the north side. I tied him and towed him back to the safety of Carcross Harbour. Windy Arm is a body of water that is six or seven miles wide where it joins the Taku Arm and about 25 miles long with nine to ten thousand-foot mountains on both sides and is fed by winds coming from the Gulf of Alaska.

There is a grass strip runway airport, and one of the railway maintenance crew had purchased a “Supercub” aircraft and had scared himself. He wanted me to fly with him until he got some mountain flying experience. He had received his pilot training in Winnipeg, where there were not many big knolls in that country, so I had an aircraft available at my pleasure to explore the country and look out for sheep, caribou, moose, and grizzly bears. With the 24-hour daylight, we could do some flying whenever his shifts were over, and the weather was good. I got endorsed on his “Supercub” and showed him some “ass savers” in flying in the mountains. The previous summer, we had a lot of fires in the Yukon, and I went with local pilots as a favor to Forestry in assessing the different fires that erupted and gained a lot of mountain flying experience with well-trained pilots. In the spring and fall, we did photographic missions and took pictures of the migrating caribou so they could assess the health of the herd.

The railroad used to take boatloads of tourists up from Skagway, and then they would take the people on the paddle wheeler, the “TUCHI,” a hundred miles south down the Taku Arm to “Ben-My-Chree,” which used to be a fairly large silver mine until an earthquake trapped nine miners underground and the mine was closed. In the early 20s, it was a thriving tourist destination, with several of the mine buildings converted to tourist accommodation until the stock market crashed in 1929, and the ensuing Depression brought about a slow demise until it was finally closed in 1956. The WPYR Railroad bought it from the estate of Mr. and Mrs. Oscar Partridge. They had originated from the Isle of Man, and in their dialect, it means “Woman of my Heart.”

I got a call from Whitehorse that I was to take a Sgt. trained in handling explosives and a demolition man to Ben-My-Chree and look after some deteriorated dynamite that had been left by the mine when it closed. They arrived in Carcross, and I had been charged with arranging food and accommodation for three people for the boat trip. I rented a big tent and gas stove from the store owner and bought food and fuel for a week, and we headed out for the 220-mile return trip in the 26-foot freighter canoe. As luck was with us, the lake was dead calm there and back, and we all got sunburnt.

The demolition expert decided that there was no way of exploding such a big cache of dynamite, as some of it would not properly detonate and would more than likely have sticks of dynamite spread all over the site. He saved a lot to blow the entrance of the mine shut, and the remaining was taken out very carefully into the deepest part of the lake and gently lowered over the side by the First Class Constable.

Mrs. Partridge had to have had a lot of flowers and a big vegetable garden of about an acre in size with the remains of an eight-foot “Moose Fence” that was overgrown with endless perennial and annual flowers that seeded themselves, as well as lots of rhubarb. That was the first of three trips that I made to Ben-My-Chree that summer. A week or so later, I took one of the Sgts fishing down the Taku Arm, and he caught a forty-four-pound lake trout, which would likely win the fishing derby prize money. The S/Sgt made good use of my freighter canoe at every opportunity to try and beat that fish. I had a sweet spot down the west arm of Bennett Lake where I could go there and be back in half an hour with a 25-pound lake trout for supper. I would stuff it with regular poultry dressing and bake it in the oven, and I would have fish for a week.

The community was divided, with a number of people living in Whitehorse having a summer place in Carcross on the north side of the Taku River. The Aboriginals lived along the water on the south side, and the railroad had a walking area on the bridge over the river. The “Tushi” steam-powered paddle wheeler boat was used to transport hundreds of people up from Skagway. They would board the boat and tour down to Ben-My-Chree, have lunch, and stay over at the lodge there. The train would take the remaining passengers along to Whitehorse and, the next day pick up the boat tour passengers and take them all back to Skagway to catch their tour boat back south.

The local natives would put on a dance and entertainment for the tourists and “Skookum” Jim and “Tagish” Charlie (who were part of the discoverers of the gold that started the Klondike Gold Rush). They would be with a group of the local natives, all dressed up in their native costumes, and perform Native dances and tell stories of how they discovered the gold on Rabbit Creek, which was later renamed Bonanza Creek. I arranged to buy Skookum Jim’s .256 Newton rifle from him and had to pay him then, but I could not have it until after he died. It is one of the many antique rifles and pistols that I have in my collection. Later that fall, I was in Whitehorse and attended a Fish and Game luncheon. Roy Weatherby, the President of Weatherby Firearms, was one of the guest speakers. I approached him after the function and said I had trouble with his sales gimmick of introducing “locking lugs” to the shooting world. He asked if I had a .256 Newton and if he could buy it from me. He said it cost him a pile of money to buy that patent from Newton many years ago. Both of the old timers died that summer and his grandson borrowed the rifle to get some moose and caribou for the big “Potlatch” they planned.

I was standing at the train station when I heard a rifle shot in the settlement. I ran across the bridge and down to the house where some of the partying was going on and saw a native backing out of the house with the rifle still in his hands. I kept telling him to drop the rifle, and he stood there in his drunken stupor. I gave him the opportunity to choose which eye I would shoot him in if he did not put the rifle down. He dropped the rifle, as he was not very quick about making decisions. I handcuffed him to the metal gate and went inside. He had shot another person in the upper stomach area, and there was blood everywhere. He was still alive and conscious, repeatedly saying, “Henry shot me.” I ran over to the hotel, as the wife of the owner was a nurse. She came with me and tried to stop the bleeding, but he died in about ten minutes. I took Henry over to the detachment and handcuffed him with his arms around the thirty-five-foot flagpole right outside the door, as I had no cells to put him in. I wrapped the rifle in a sheet, hid it in my bed, and tried phoning Whitehorse, but the phone was dead.

To get radio communication to advise Whitehorse of the incident, I had to drive 40 miles to the top of the hill, where I could first make radio contact and then drive back. When I pulled into the front of my detachment building, my prisoner was no longer handcuffed to the flagpole and nowhere in sight. He had used the sharp edges of the handcuffs to help him shinny up to the top of the flagpole, but with the inconvenience of the handcuffs no longer helping him, they were hindering him. His handhold gave out, and he slid down the 35 feet and broke his leg on the flagpole support post, which was about four feet up from the ground. I was able to follow the drag tracks of him crawling in the sand and found him hiding underneath the old paddle-wheeler, about five hundred yards away.

I ran back, got the police car, and loaded him in the back seat. I drove over to the railway station, located the nurse, and she strapped his legs together with some short pieces of 2 x 4s right in the car. She used my pants belt and service belt to make sure it stayed secure for the 78-mile trip to the hospital. She gave him a shot to ease some of his pain, and I headed out for Whitehorse. I met the members on the way and filled them in on my situation over the radio and that I was headed to the hospital in Whitehorse. I notified Whitehorse of the current situation and asked them to alert the hospital and provide another member at the hospital to guard the prisoner, as I would have to return to get statements from the witnesses, as I could identify all who were in the house when the chap was killed. I wanted to get the statements before they had a chance to sober up and concoct a story about the events.

When I got back to Carcross and went to take some pictures with the Identification Section, there was no one in the house other than the murder victim. The coroner arrived with the ambulance, and the body was conveyed to Whitehorse for an autopsy. I continued to find people and get their statements. Most everyone I contacted either claimed they were passed out or could not remember what happened, other than the deceased telling Henry that he was not of the Tagish people and would not be accepted as a member. He told him to go back to Whitehorse. When he picked up the rifle by the door and fired one shot, the “Potlatch” had gone on for several days of drinking some of their homebrew made from everything they could get to ferment, with lots of game to eat and lots of fiddle playing and dancing. I had stood back all of my waking hours, and any fights that took place, my presence was enough to calm things down, allowing them to celebrate the funeral of two celebrities of their tribe.

When it came to court time, his lawyer emphasized the poor treatment he had received from the police and his suffering from the broken leg. He was sentenced to a year in jail and was out in six months for good behavior. He later stabbed and killed a mother of five and received a two-year sentence. A few years later, he shot a person near Edmonton, got some white man justice, and received a ten-year sentence. He was killed in a fight in prison.