Two geologists arrived in Carcross and were inquiring how they could best get to the Engineer Gold Mine. My neighbor told them that it was on the west side of the Windy Arm and that all the buildings associated with the mill were still standing, and the cable towers were still standing. The mine itself was near the top of the mountain. He said it had been closed for possibly thirty years and there were still a lot of old foundations and some small buildings visible above the treeline. He had not made the climb, but you could see the mine entrance and the buildings from the east side of Windy Arm.

They had a touring permit issued by the Yukon Tourist Department, and I rented them my boat to go down to the mill site on Windy Arm. They planned on being on the mountain for 8 to 10 days. On the 7th day, they came to the detachment and told me that they had discovered a cat road that came down off the mountain and ended up about a mile south of the settlement by the railroad by Bennett Lake. It was a good road all the way with no steep climbs. It had obviously been used to haul all of the cable and steel for the towers. The mill had been taken to the site in the winter with horses hauling everything on the ice road. They said that the tailing piles out of the mine were worth processing, as the bigger chunks of rock would not have been able to be put through the crusher of that era and contained lots of traces of gold. They advised that my boat was tied up by the mill. They also mentioned that they had discovered a pile of deteriorated explosives stored underneath one of the old tent frames, which represented a danger if anyone did not know about deteriorated explosives. They said the mine entrance had been blown closed when the mine was shut down and was no danger to anyone. Records showed that the main bunkhouse and kitchen had caught fire during the winter, and a number of people perished from the cold while attempting to make their way off the mountain, which resulted in the mine being closed. I took them down Windy Arm and recovered my boat.

Trip To Deal With Deteriorated Explosives

I contacted the Yukon Tourist Department, and they recommended a contact in the Game Branch in Whitehorse. He volunteered a four-wheel pickup to help me get to the site so I could deal with the deteriorated explosives, and so they could discover another trail near the top of the mountains. They were forever issuing people permits to climb Nares Mountain, which started about two miles out of Carcross, and they promoted it as a 4.5-hour trip, but that was just for the climb up the mountain. A number of times during the summer, there would be a lot of overdue climbers, and I could spot them coming back down the mountain really late in the day with my spotting scope. For those who have not climbed a mountain, it is easily three times as hard to climbdown a mountain as to climb up. Your muscles, with each step-down, are carrying your full weight to a stop without any time to rest, and they play out, forcing you to stop to rest, or your legs will cramp up, causing a great deal of pain and discomfort if you do not rest regularly on the way down.

When the Game Branch arrived, I showed him some of my pictures of grizzly bears, caribou, big horn sheep, and moose that I had taken from the aircraft in the immediate area. I packed enough food and a small tent, and we headed up Montana Mountain. It was a gentle climb up the valley, and as we drove along, he got his packet of snoose (chewing tobacco) and offered it to me. I had watched other people go through the tapping of the lid, taking a pinch of the tobacco, and then putting it into their lower lip. There was a bit of a rough area on the road, and I raised the packet close to my mouth at about the time he was watching me and hit the side of the embankment with the front right wheel. My elbow hit the side window, and most of the tobacco went into my mouth. I must have had four times as much tobacco in my mouth as a normal chewer would have had, and we did not have any water to wash out my mouth. Much of it that I could spit out stuck everywhere in my mouth, and I was overwhelmed by the strong tobacco. He stopped, and I got out, gagged, and coughed, and I could not get it all out, even with my finger in my mouth. I needed only one session of “snoose” to last me the rest of my life.

When we got to the mine, the entrance was on the west side of the mountain with a big pile of rubble rock below the entrance. The beginning of the cable bucket system went on towers down the mountain to the mill, where they crushed the ore and then bagged it for shipment. The remains of the encampment were a pile of rock foundations where the bunkhouse, kitchen, and mess area had been located. There were several tent foundations located in the flat area below the mine, remnants from other geological groups that must have visited the mine to investigate the possibility of reopening it.

We located the deteriorated dynamite, and there were six cases that showed signs of leakage of nitroglycerine on the outside of the cardboard containers, so it would not be safe to transport it anywhere. We just took it out from underneath the tent frame and placed it very gently on top of the tent frame. We went up by the mine opening on top of the tailing pile so that the shock wave would blow past us when the dynamite exploded. I took out my service revolver and, firing from about 300 yards, did not hit the pile. I then took the .308 rifle with a scope, and the first shot set off the dynamite. There was a huge flash that filled the bottom of the little valley, and then the explosion and shock wave went past us without any harm, as we were both lying down, only looking over the edge of a big block of rock. The grass and weeds were stretched out in every direction away from the blast center, and the shards of wood kept floating down from the air for about two minutes.

I had a bad experience in Dawson City when I found an abandoned log cabin on one of the creeks. It was in a narrow valley with about 50 feet of a rock face extending out to the valley with the creek going past, and the back of the cabin was a straight wall of basalt extending a couple of hundred feet. I had gone into the cabin, and it had a calendar dated 1948 and marked off until October, so I assumed it was last occupied in that year. In one corner of the cabin was a pile of four boxes of dynamite. I went outside and saw signs that the nitroglycerine had leaked out onto the bottom logs. I chose to hide behind a big spruce tree that was as far back as I could see the bottom of the cabin, estimating that I was a good 200 yards away. When I fired the rifle, it was utter chaos as the front half of the roof went up into the air and started circling toward me. The shock blast blew all the front branches off the spruce tree and bruised my right arm as they went past me. With the contained area of vertical rock, the shock wave sent all of the logs downhill toward me and stacked them up in front of my spruce tree. The dust and dirt hung in the air for a good fifteen minutes and filled the valley.

It brings to mind when I was stationed in Coppermine. The engineering firm that built the new school brought in enough dynamite to level the site before they began to build. Being engineers, they were not able to figure out that if you take material off a sloping rock, the high part of the excavation would adequately fill the lower portion of the slope. So, they had twice as much dynamite on-site as required. It is very expensive to fly dynamite in and out of the settlement, so they solved the problem by selling the strongly built dynamite storage building, complete with contents, to one of the Eskimos for a dollar. As an added bonus, they delivered it to his yard. Ten years later, somebody broke into the building, and he reported it to the police. An inventory of the building revealed nothing stolen, and he still had all of his caribou and seals in the building. It was in the middle of the settlement with houses all around it.

However, there was a pile of nine boxes of 60% dynamite showing signs of nitroglycerine leakage on the bottom boxes. I took the problem to my Cpl., and he decided that there was no use endangering both of us. We would have one of our wives pull a match out of a box of matches, and the one who got the short match would move the dynamite by himself. His wife pulled out the matches, and about the third layer down, with her eyes closed, she handed me the match, and it was short. We had a brand new Ford ¾-ton four-wheel-drive truck, and I backed it into the building and very gingerly placed the boxes of dynamite in the back. I drove out of the settlement at about five miles an hour and the five miles from the settlement to the airport. I went to the far end of the runway, and the bank was too steep to drive down. The airport is built along the slope that goes down to the ocean, and I figured it would send any tundra and debris toward the ocean with the slope angling that way. I very gently drove about halfway from the runway to the road that went along the shore and offloaded the boxes of dynamite. I put all of the caps into the top box, cut two pieces of fuse about ten feet long, and fused both of the sticks of dynamite, placing them on top of the pile.

I lit both fuses at the same time, immediately got into the truck, and hurried out of there. I drove partway down the Airport Road and stood in the back of the truck to take a video picture of the impending explosion. All of a sudden, the first raven came over me and went directly to the pile of boxes away out on the tundra, a good 800 feet off the runway. Then there were groups of ravens until there must have been thirty investigating that strange pile of boxes. I began to run the video camera, and there was this huge kachung sound. A black cloud appeared above that area, and the big boom sent a huge amount of soil and debris a thousand feet into the air, coming back down over the airport runway.

I drove onto the runway, and to my dismay, there were endless blocks of frozen tundra scattered along most of the length of the runway. Panic set in because I knew the scheduled flight of a Twin Otter was due to arrive about 2:00 p.m. So I parked the truck directly across the middle of the runway and began grabbing the larger, ragged chunks of frozen soil, carrying and throwing them off to the side of the runway. Some of them weighed 70-80 pounds. The fist-sized chunks I could throw off on both sides from where I picked them up. I was over halfway done before the Cpl. came to check on me, having to walk the five miles, figuring the worst after hearing the explosion in the Detachment and not seeing me return to the settlement. We finished throwing the remaining chunks off the runway and then drove the truck down to take pictures of the hole and examine what had happened to cause all of that debris to be thrown onto the airport runway. The hole was a good hundred feet across and possibly thirty feet deep. I understand that it became the drop site for the “honey wagon” for over the next forty years, so I figure it was good planning and engineering on my behalf.