In 1987, I was handed over the Auxiliary Constable program by the officer in charge of the Sherwood Park Detachment to see if we could make it work. It had fallen into a social gathering at their convenience. I had the pleasure of working with all of the Auxiliary Constables, and Fred and Brian were, in my opinion, two of the best. It had become a social club, and many of the Auxiliary members enjoyed the prestige of being associated with the RCMP but did not participate in active patrols; a couple had never even been in a police car with a member.

I began a training program that included qualifying the Auxiliary members in the use of the revolver, shotgun, and rifle. Even though they were not carrying any firearms, they would be confident in their use and capable of providing assistance if the situation proved necessary. For a while, we had weekly training programs lasting a couple of hours, focusing on dress and deportment and what was expected of them in assisting the members and being the second person in the police vehicle. I had the members ofthe Highway Patrol prepare lectures on any subject they felt would be valuable to Auxiliary members. Both Brian and Fred devoted endless hours of their own time, and I would consider them to be more like policemen than many of the recruits coming out of training at Regina. They were seasoned adults who could focus on catching criminals and displayed a unique sense of understanding of violators.

They knew the area and the “rounders” in the community and were a great source of information about what was really taking place in the community. I consider it an honor to say that I enjoyed all of their participation and fellowship until I retired in 1994. I recognized that their trusted service was all on a voluntary basis. I used to host a social event once a month at our acreage, and the Auxiliary members and their families were part of the barbecues and sporting events on the lawn for all the kids, with the cars out of the garage and the music, turned up. These are good memories, and I am proud to say that I enjoyed their voluntary participation in making the community a much safer place to live.